Journey Towards a Democratic, Humane

and Inclusive Economy

National Budget Speech

FY2026-27

Amir Khosru Mahmud Chowdhury M.P.

Minister

Finance and Planning Ministry

People's Republic of Bangladesh

28 Jaishtha 1433

11 June 2026

i

Table of Contents

Chapter I: Introduction … 1

Chapter II: Economic Scenario … 8

(A) Comparative Overview of the Macroeconomy … 8

(B) Global Geopolitical Context and Its Impact (Middle East Crisis)

… 16

Chapter III: Medium-Term Economic Policy and Strategy… 20

Chapter IV: Supplementary Budget for FY 2025-26 … 35

Chapter V: Proposed Budget for FY 2026-27 … 37

Chapter VI: Sectoral Priority … 41

Education and Human Resource Development … 42

Health and Family Welfare … 47

Agriculture and Food Security … 56

Social Security and Inclusive Development … 63

Power and Energy Sector … 68

ICT, Telecommunications and Scientific Research … 74

Employment and Skill Development … 80

Development of a Creative Economy … 87

Investment, Industry and Trade … 92

Local Government and Rural Development … 97

Communication Infrastructure … 100

Environment and Climate Change … 107

Management of Water Resources … 111

ii

Disaster Management … 113

Women and Child Development … 116

Relious freedon and harmony … 118

Chapter VII: Revenue Management and Revenue Collection … 120

Chapter VIII: Improving the Ease of Doing Business through

Deregulation … 166

Chapter IX: Conclusion … 183

iii

List of Tables

Annex A: List of Budget Allocation Tables

Table-1: Supplementary Budget for FY 2025-26………………………… 184

Table-2: Proposed Budget Structure for FY 2026-27 …………………… 185

Table-3: Sectoral Allocation of Annual Development Programme……… 186

Table-4: Sectoral Allocation in overall Budget ………………………… 188

Table-5: Ministry/Division-wise Budget Allocation …………………… 190

Annex B: List of Income Tax Tables

Table-1: Tax-Free Income Threshold for Individual Taxpayers and Hindu

Undivided

Families

……………………………………………………………………..…… 192

Table-2: Tax Slabs and Tax Rates for Individual Taxpayers and Hindu

Undivided Families …………………………………………………… 193

Table-3: Tax Rates for Companies, Associations of Persons, Firms, Tsrusts and

Other Taxpayers (Tax Years 2026-27 to 2030-31) ………….………… 194

Annex C: List of Import-Export Tariff Tables

Table-1(a) to table-1(c) ……………………………………….…… 196-229

iv

1

Chapter I: Introduction

In the name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful.

Mr. Speaker,

Assalamu Alaikum.

01.

In the aftermath of more than fifteen years of struggle against

tyranny and fascism, Bangladesh has once again embarked on a renewed

democratic journey, paved by the sacrifices and bloodshed of the

historic mass uprising of students and citizens in 2024. On 12 February

2026, following a free, fair, credible and peaceful national election on

12 February 2026, the people of Bangladesh vested a BNP-led

government with a two-thirds majority. Today I have the honour of

standing before this august Jatiya Sangsad been entrusted with the

responsibility of the Ministry of Finance, to present the first national

budget of this newly elected government.

02.

At the outset, I pay my deepest respects to the heroic martyrs, to

the women who suffered unspeakably and to all those who sacrificed for

our independence. I also pay tribute to the martyrs who laid down their

lives in the long struggle for democracy since our independence, as well

as to the victims who suffered enforced disappearances, political

violence, targeted attacks, arbitrary persecution, and grievous injuries in

the pursuit of democratic rights and justice. Their sacrifices, courage,

and resilience have expanded the horizons of democracy, strengthened

the cause of fundamental rights, and renewed our collective hope for a

just, free, and prosperous Bangladesh.

2

Mr. Speaker,

03.

At every critical juncture in the history of our nation and its

people, under the leadership of Shaheed President Ziaur Rahman and

later Begum Khaleda Zia, BNP has consistently stood by the hopes and

aspirations of the people and guided the country forward. Over more

than fifteen years, BNP has also led the long democratic struggle of the

people against an entrenched fascist regime. The movement that

emerged under BNP's leadership, anchored in Vision 2030 of 2016, the

27-Point Programme for State Reform of 2022, and the 31-Point Reform

Agenda of the Joint Movement in 2023, laid the foundation for the anti-

fascist mass uprising. It was upon this foundation that the historic

student-people uprising of 2024 took place. Under the leadership of Mr.

Prime Minister Mr. Tarique Rahman, BNP has furthered its reform

agenda through its 31-point framework for the reform, repair, and

transformation of politics and the state. Building on this framework, an

expanded set of proposals reflecting the aspirations of the uprising has

been presented in the form of the July National Charter. The Mr. Prime

Minister has already pledged before the nation that the July National

Charter we have signed, will be implemented in both letter and spirit

04.

The BNP has long raised the question of political reform,

recognizing that the fascist regime not only caused a deep economic

crisis but also severely damaged the socio-cultural fabric of the country.

In such a context, recovery and renewal are not possible without

meaningful political reform.

At the same time, it must also be recognised that without the

democratasition of the economy, i.e., without building an inclusive and

accountable economic system that accommodates all citizens, and

without fostering humane cultural relations, political reform alone will

not be sustainable.

3

05.

During the BNP governments of 1991-1996 and 2001-2006,

guided by a farsighted and welfare-oriented economic philosophy, the

key macroeconomic indicators remained on a generally positive

trajectory. However, the fascist government through the misuse of state

power weakened and hollowed out public institutions by widespread

corruption and plundering of the economy. Under the guise of so-called

development, it weakened the very foundations of our economy through

large-scale looting and money laundering. In this context, the people

have entrusted BNP with the responsibility not only of recovery, but also

of placing the economy on a path of transformation and sustained

prosperity. Under the leadership of the Mr. Prime Minister, the present

government has accepted this daunting challenge.

06.

It is precisely for this reason that we consider the formulation

and implementation of the national budget as one of the foremost

conditions for political and economic reconstruction. It is not merely an

accounting statement of government revenues and expenditures, but a

strategic roadmap for steering the country toward economic stability

while transforming the country's vast economic potential into reality.

The budget must also reflect the government's commitment to ensuring

a secure, prosperous, and dignified life for people from all walks of life.

Mr. Speaker,

07.

As I mentioned earlier, during fascist rule, economic policy and

planning were often shaped by narrow interests rather than national

priorities. Consequently, the resources of the country were concentrated

in the hands of a limited group of vested interests through corruption

and systemic inefficiencies, while macroeconomic weaknesses were

obscured through the presentation of misleading statistical narratives.

08.

Accordingly, the economic engine, the primary driver of nation-

building, was progressively weakened over more than fifteen years,

leaving it completely crippled. From the midst of these ruins, we seek

4

to fulfil our promise of a renewed national journey. In our election

manifesto, we outlined a vision of a humane, democratic, and welfare-

oriented Bangladesh grounded in democracy, accountability, good

governance,

equitable

development,

and

expanded

economic

opportunity. Since assuming office, the Government has begun

implementing these priorities with urgency, focus, and determination.

Mr. Speaker,

09.

As we embark on this new democratic journey, inspired by the

aspirations of the people's historic mass uprising, we find ourselves

confronting a complex set of global and regional challenges. Persistent

geopolitical tensions and across different regions of the world have

heightened uncertainty in the international economy, contributing to

fragmentation in trade, finance, and investment flows. These

developments pose significant challenges for developing countries,

including Bangladesh. Against this backdrop, and mindful of the fragile

condition of our domestic economy, we have prepared this budget with

a clear determination to safeguard stability and lay the foundations for

sustained progress. Our economic strategy places macroeconomic

stability, investment promotion, production expansion, employment

creation, and, above all, economic justice at its core.

10.

Going forward, we aim to transform Bangladesh into a one-

trillion-dollar economy by 2034, driven by investment, productivity and

job creation. At the same time, we seek to democratise economic

opportunities across society, enabling us to harness the Demographic

Dividend and the Longevity Dividend and translate them into a

Democratic Dividend. In line with this objective, the Government aims

to reduce inflation to 7.5 per cent and raise GDP growth to 6.5 per cent

in the upcoming fiscal year. These targets are designed to ensure

stability, enhance purchasing power, and improve living standards.

Accordingly, the Budget is built around ten strategic priorities:

5

1) Inclusive Development: Our development agenda will ensure

meaningful equitable participation of all citizens, classes, sectors,

and regions so that the benefits of growth are shared equitably.

2) Quality Education and Healthcare for All: Transforming the

education system into a skills-based, value-oriented framework

while ensuring universal access to quality healthcare as a

fundamental right.

3) Universal Social Protection: Establishing a universal, life-cycle-

based social protection system to ensure social security coverage for

citizens at all stages of life, thereby reinforcing the foundation of a

welfare state.

4) An Economy driven by Investment, Employment, and

Production: Agriculture will be given a strategic priority,

supporting production, livelihoods, and food security. Alongside

this, we will promote entrepreneurship, accelerate industrialisation,

diversify exports, and leverage technology to create sustainable jobs

and income opportunities, particularly for young people.

5) Deregulation and a Cost-effective, Simplified

Business

Environment: Fostering a transparent, streamlined, and cost-

efficient business environment by deregulating government

procedures and eliminating delays and unnecessary administrative

steps.

6) Financial Sector Stability: Restoring discipline, transparency, and

accountability across the banking and financial sectors to safeguard

depositors' interests, rebuild public confidence, and reinforce

institutional responsibility, while promoting investment through

reforms aimed at developing a vibrant and efficient capital market.

7) Energy Security: Ensure a reliable supply of power and energy to

support economic activity while pursuing a self-reliant energy

strategy that delivers affordable, dependable, and environmentally

sustainable energy solutions.

6

8) Digital Transformation and ICT Development: Transforming

Bangladesh into one of the world's leading exporters of ICT products

and services by building a technologically advanced, innovative, and

inclusive digital economy.

9) Management of Life, Nature, Environment, and Water

Resources: Protecting the nation from the impacts of climate

change and preserving biodiversity by transforming community-led

afforestation into a green revolution; mainstreaming environmental

considerations in development planning; restoring the navigability

of rivers; and relaunching canal restoration and excavation

programmes to build a sustainable, green, climate-resilient, and

livable future for generations to come.

10) Transparent, Efficient, and Accountable Institutions and

Administrative Systems: Building transparent, efficient, and

accountable institutions and administrative systems, while fostering

merit-based governance and enhancing the efficiency and

effectiveness of public investment implementation.

Mr. Speaker

11.

We are placing special emphasis on emerging and future-

oriented economic sectors that hold significant potential for income

generation and the expansion of public welfare, including the Creative

Economy, Sports Economy, Green Economy, and Blue Economy.

Efforts are underway to develop and mainstream these sectors within

the national economy.

12.

In determining and implementing investment and budget

priorities for the journey ahead, we are guided by a set of fundamental

principles designed to ensure efficiency, impact and sustainability in the

use of public resources: 1) Value for Money: ensuring the most

effective and efficient utilisation of our limited resources; 2) Return on

Investment: carefully selecting and prioritising projects that generate

7

strong and measurable economic benefits from public resources

invested; 3) Job Creation: assessing each investment in terms of its

potential to employment generation; and 4) Environmental

Consideration: maintaining a consistent focus on safeguarding life,

nature, and the environment.

Mr. Speaker

13.

We have begun a transformative journey to build a Bangladesh

that is competitive, productive, equitable, inclusive, and dignified, by

dismantling the entrenched oligarchic control of a privileged few. This

budget outlines our foundational steps in that direction. We are

confident that this budget will function as a one-year policy framework

that renders development non-discriminatory, ensures the state is

accountable, promotes safe and decent employment. It will also

empower citizens from all walks of life and professions to actively

participate in our nation's historic journey of development.

8

Chapter II: Economic Scenario

14.

At this stage, I would like to briefly present before the August

Jatiya

Sangsad

the

comparative

overview

of

Bangladesh's

macroeconomy, as along with the evolving geopolitical context shaped

by the Middle East conflict since the present Government assumed

office. The purpose is to present a comprehensive picture of the

economic realities currently facing the people of the country.

(A) Comparative Overview of the Macroeconomy

Real Sector: Trends in Growth, Production, Investment and

Inflation

Mr. Speaker

15.

In recent years, Bangladesh's economy has experienced

significant volatility, external pressures, and deep-rooted structural

challenges. To appreciate the magnitude of the current situation, it is

important to reflect on our past performance. During the final fiscal year

of the BNP Government (FY 2005-06), GDP growth stood at a strong

6.78 per cent, supported by a vibrant and productive industrial sector.

The economy was stable, with a balanced relationship between national

investment and savings. In contrast, the period under the fascist

Government has been marked by a steady economic slowdown. GDP

growth declined to 5.78 per cent in FY 2022-23, further fell to 4.22 per

cent in FY 2023-24, and has now eased to 3.49 per cent in FY 2024-25.

This downward trend has been driven by a combination of factors,

including sector-wide corruption, external shocks, rising inflation, and

severe mismanagement and structural weaknesses in the financial

sector. Elevated interest rates, persistent energy constraints, weakening

investor confidence, and governance challenges have together

dampened private-sector investment. At the same time, rising prices

9

have significantly eroded the purchasing power of ordinary citizens,

making the cost of essential goods and services increasingly

burdensome in daily life.

Mr. Speaker

16.

It was the BNP governments that historically laid the

groundwork for Bangladesh's modern, investment-friendly economy. In

1981, under the BNP administration, the Foreign Private Investment

(Promotion and Protection) Act and the Bangladesh Industrial

Investment (Promotion and Protection) Act were enacted. Today, these

landmark laws remain the bedrock of our legal framework, safeguarding

both domestic and foreign investments. Furthermore, the then-BNP

Government pioneered revolutionary structural reforms: they abolished

investment ceilings, introduced back-to-back Letters of Credit (L/C),

and established bonded warehouse facilities. These critical interventions

catalyzed the exponential growth of our Ready-Made Garments (RMG)

sector and unlocked overseas manpower exports. Subsequently, the

introduction of the Value Added Tax (VAT) system in 1991 engineered

a fundamental, permanent structural transformation of our national

economy.

Mr. Speaker

17.

Curbing high inflation remains our most urgent macroeconomic

challenge. In July 2024, general inflation surged to 11.66 per cent, while

food inflation spiked to a catastrophic 14.10 per cent, the highest levels

seen in recent history. The burden of this inflation falls squarely on low-

and middle-income households, stripping them of their real income,

wiping out their life savings, and plunging families into financial

distress. To put this into perspective, under the BNP administration in

FY 2005-06, inflation was successfully managed and maintained at a

highly stable and moderate rate of 7.17 per cent.

10

Fiscal Sector: Tax-GDP ratio, Revenue Mobilization, Expenditure

and Deficit Trends

Mr. Speaker

18.

Persistent structural weaknesses within our revenue sector

remain among the most deep-rooted vulnerabilities of our national

economy. For years, the tax-to-GDP ratio has stagnated below 8 per

cent, a figure significantly lower than that of our regional and economic

peers. This critically limits the Government's capacity to mobilize

domestic revenue. While the demand for essential development projects

and social welfare expenditure has steadily escalated, revenue collection

has failed to keep pace, thereby intensifying the pressure on deficit

financing. During the July-April period of FY 2025-26, total revenue

collection reached Tk. 3 lakh 82 thousand 896 crore, representing a 9.87

per cent growth over the same period of the previous fiscal year. Of this

collection, the National Board of Revenue (NBR) accounted for Tk. 3

lakh 29 thousand 772 crore. Yet, despite this nominal progress,

performance remains substantially below target, presenting a severe

challenge to our fiscal balance and overall macroeconomic stability.

19.

The crisis, however, is not confined to revenue mobilization

alone; systemic bottlenecks in budget implementation have become

equally glaring. Although the total budget size for FY 2024-25 was set

at Tk. 7 lakh 97 thousand crore, the Interim Government adjusted the

budget to Tk. 7 lakh 90 thousand crore for FY 2025-26 in an effort to

balance income and expenditure. Even with this measure,

implementation constraints forced revisions to align the budget with

ground realities, a process that disrupts our targeted goals for economic

growth and employment. It is notable that during the first ten months of

the current fiscal year, up to April, total expenditure reached only about

60 per cent of the revised budget allocation. Most critically, the

implementation rate of the Annual Development Programme (ADP)

stood at a dismal 40.7 per cent. This sobering experience proves that

11

setting ambitious targets is meaningless without ensuring a realistic,

functional balance among revenue generation, expenditure planning,

and implementation capacity.

Mr. Speaker

20.

Let us look at the historical data. In FY 2005-06, the revenue-

to-GDP ratio stood at 8.2 per cent, while total expenditure was contained

at 11.1 per cent of GDP, maintaining a manageable budget deficit of just

2.9 percent of GDP. In stark contrast, due to systemic mismanagement,

rampant corruption, and misguided economic policies, during the fascist

regime, the revenue-to-GDP ratio completely failed to improve. By FY

2023-24, it remained entirely stagnant at that same 8.2 per cent.

Conversely, public expenditure bloated to 12.3 per cent of GDP, driving

the budget deficit up to an unsustainable 4.05 per cent of GDP. Because

government spending expanded aggressively while revenue collection

remained paralyzed, the deficit widened. This fiscal recklessness has not

only strained public financial management but has also escalated risks

in public debt management, steadily undermining the long-term

sustainability of our national debt.

21.

To finance these widening budget deficits, the previous

governments relied heavily on both domestic and external borrowing.

The numbers speak for themselves. External debt, which stood at Tk. 1

lakh 30 thousand crore in 2006, skyrocketed to Tk. 8 lakh 12 thousand

crore by 2024. Even more alarming is the domestic debt trajectory: the

domestic debt load of Tk. 65,000 crore left behind by our government

in 2006 has exploded nearly sixteen-fold to an astounding Tk. 10 lakh

77 thousand crore. Consequently, our debt-servicing obligations have

grown exponentially. Annual interest payments have surged more than

thirteen-fold, escalating from Tk. 85 thousand crore in FY 2005-06 to a

staggering Tk. 1 lakh 14 thousand 700 crore in FY 2023-24, trapping

public finances under an immense fiscal burden.

12

Monetary and Financial Sector: Monetary Policy, Financial

Stability and Capital Market

Mr. Speaker

22.

To address persistent and entrenched inflationary pressures, the

Central Bank has been compelled to adopt a tight monetary policy

stance. In this context, the policy rate has been progressively raised to

10.0 per cent, with immediate transmission effects on interbank lending

rates. While this tightening has helped moderate broad money (M2)

growth and contain aggregate demand, the higher cost of borrowing has

placed considerable pressure on production activities and industrial

investment, thereby constraining overall economic momentum. In

comparison, during FY 2005-06, broad money (M2) growth stood at

19.3 per cent, while reserve money growth reached 23.9 per cent,

reflecting strong liquidity conditions and robust economic activity. By

FY 2023-24, however, the macroeconomic environment had weakened

significantly. Broad money (M2) growth declined to 7.7 per cent, and

reserve money growth slowed to 7.9 per cent. Similarly, private sector

credit growth-a key driver of economic expansion-stood at 18.3 per

cent in FY 2005-06, but fell sharply to 6.5 per cent by FY 2024-25,

indicating a substantial contraction in credit flow to the private sector.

Mr. Speaker

23.

The financial sector we have inherited is a matter of serious

national concern. Over the years, systemic irregularities, politically

influenced and opaque lending practices, inadequate transparency,

misuse of loan rescheduling facilities, and the deliberate masking of

non-performing assets have significantly undermined the foundations of

the banking system. In December 2005, the non-performing loan (NPL)

ratio in the overall banking sector stood at 13.6 per cent. By the first

quarter of FY 2025-26, this figure had risen sharply to 35.73 per cent,

which is more than Tk 6 lakh 44 thousand crore, reflecting a substantial

13

deterioration in asset quality. As a result, several banking institutions

are now facing acute liquidity pressures, while depositor confidence has

been severely affected, necessitating emergency interventions and

institutional consolidation in certain cases. Similarly, the Capital

Adequacy Ratio (CAR), which stood at a relatively stable 7.3 per cent

in 2005, has declined significantly to -2.64 per cent by the end of 2025.

This erosion in capital buffers highlights deep structural weaknesses

within the sector and has placed considerable strain on financial

stability. Overall, these developments have weakened public confidence

in the banking system and have created difficulties for ordinary citizens

in accessing their own savings in a timely manner.

24.

The capital market has been systematically devastated by

catastrophic

mismanagement,

institutional

scams,

rampant

irregularities,

and

fundamentally

flawed

policy

interventions,

culminating in the absolute erasure of investor confidence. History

proves that whenever the BNP has steered the Government, the banking,

financial, and capital markets have remained entirely stable and free

from such manufactured crises. The numbers reflect the scale of recent

destruction: in January 2024, total market capitalization stood at Tk.

7,51,734 crore, but by April 2026, it had bled out to Tk. 6,85,119 crore.

Over this same period, the DSE General Index collapsed from 6,153 to

a low of 5,287. This trend suggests that key elements essential for a well-

functioning capital market, such as transparency, accountability, market

depth, and a strong institutional framework for long-term financing,

have yet to be sufficiently strengthened and consolidated.

External Sector: Export-Import, Remittances, Foreign Exchange

Reserves and Balance of Payments

Mr. Speaker

25.

In FY 2005-06, export and import growth recorded strong

performances of 21.6 per cent and 12.2 per cent, respectively,

14

contributing to sustained external trade momentum. In contrast, by FY

2023-24, both of these key indicators had recorded, reflecting

significant external sector pressures. The currency has experienced

substantial depreciation. In FY 2005-06, the exchange rate of the

Bangladeshi Taka stood at approximately Tk. 68 per US dollar, which

fell to Tk. 122 per US dollar by FY 2023-24. This sharp depreciation

has placed considerable strain on the balance of payments and

contributed to pressure on foreign exchange reserves.

Mr. Speaker,

26.

Our export sector remains highly vulnerable due to an

overdependence on a narrow product base and limited market

diversification. This structural challenge will be acutely felt once

Bangladesh graduates from Least Developed Country (LDC) status. The

preferential tariff benefits, duty-free and quota-free market access, and

policy flexibilities currently enjoyed as an LDC will gradually be phased

out after graduation. In this context, proactive and immediate

preparation is essential. Bangladesh has no alternative but to pursue

product diversification, enhance quality and compliance standards,

expand into non-traditional markets, negotiate bilateral trade

agreements, modernise port and customs infrastructure, and strengthen

overall export competitiveness. Against this backdrop, the Government

has formally requested a deferral of LDC graduation for at least three

years. This additional timeframe is necessary to implement key

domestic reforms and ensure a smooth and resilient economic transition.

Public Debt Management and Interest Expenditure

Mr. Speaker

27.

Long-term macroeconomic stability is closely linked to

sustainable public debt management. Over the past fifteen years,

however, this key pillar of fiscal stability has come under increasing

15

pressure due to rising borrowing requirements and expanding public

expenditure commitments. During this period, a significant portion of

public investment was financed through debt, including a number of

large-scale projects. While these investments contributed to

infrastructure expansion, they also led to a substantial increase in both

external and domestic debt obligations, thereby exerting pressure on

fiscal space. The evolution of public debt reflects this trend. External

public debt, which stood at approximately Tk. 1 lakh 30 thousand crore

in 2006, increased to around Tk. 8 lakh 12 thousand crore by June 2024.

Similarly, domestic debt rose from about Tk. 65 thousand crore in 2006

to approximately Tk. 10 lakh 77 thousand crore over the same period.

As debt levels increased, interest expenditure also grew significantly.

National interest payments, which stood at Tk. 8 thousand 500 crore in

FY 2005-06, rose to Tk. 1 lakh 14 thousand 700 crore in FY 2023-24,

reflecting the growing burden of debt servicing on the budget and its

implications for development spending.

28.

Due to this unchecked, politically motivated borrowing in the

name of artificial development, Bangladesh's debt-carrying capacity has

progressively deteriorated. According to the Joint Debt Sustainability

Analysis (DSA) conducted by the International Monetary Fund (IMF)

and the World Bank, the "low risk" classification that our government

maintained and left behind has been revised downward to "moderate

risk" category. This downgrade was driven entirely by a total absence

of policy discipline and the systematic presentation of inflated, opaque

macroeconomic data by the previous administration.

Mr. Speaker

29.

Furthermore, the fiscal risks are compounded by massive hidden

liabilities. The previous government issued guarantees worth hundreds

of crores of Taka on behalf of failing state-owned enterprises,

accumulated astronomical liabilities through capacity charges in the

power and energy sectors, and created massive contingent liabilities via

16

toxic non-performing loans in the banking sector. By consistently

masking and concealing these massive financial obligations, the ousted

regime pushed our entire economy to the brink of vulnerability, vastly

complicating the recovery roadmap for this government.

(B) Global Geopolitical Context and Its Impact (Middle

East Crisis)

Mr Speaker,

30.

The post-COVID global economy has still not fully returned to

a stable position. According to projections by the International

Monetary Fund (IMF), global growth in 2026 is expected to remain at

around 3.3 per cent, while global inflation may hover near 3.8 per cent.

This suggests that, although the global economy continues to expand,

the pace of recovery remains modest and is accompanied by persistent

uncertainties. Against this backdrop, the recent developments in the

Middle East have introduced additional risks to the global economic

outlook, particularly through upward pressure on energy and petroleum

prices. A prolonged continuation of this situation may lead to further

increases in international fuel prices, as well as higher transportation and

insurance costs. It may also disrupt global shipping routes and create

new challenges for the smooth flow of international trade. At the same

time, elevated global interest rates continue to constrain international

financial flows. This has contributed to higher costs of external

borrowing, trade financing, and essential imports. For an import-

dependent economy such as Bangladesh, with significant reliance on

external trade and remittance inflows, these evolving global conditions

constitute direct and material risks to macroeconomic stability.

17

Energy Security: Uncertainty in Oil, Gas, Fertiliser, Transport

Costs, and Supply

Mr. Speaker

31.

Just ten days after our government assumed office, the outbreak

of the Middle East crisis introduced significant and unexpected risks to

our economic landscape. The immediate impact of this regional

instability has been most pronounced in the energy sector, where

international prices of oil, liquefied natural gas (LNG), and chemical

fertilizers increased sharply, in some cases more than doubling. These

elevated energy costs have directly translated into higher production

expenses across the power, agriculture, transport, and industrial sectors,

thereby intensifying domestic inflationary pressures and placing a

substantial burden on public finances in the form of increased subsidies.

At the same time, higher import costs have exerted additional pressure

on already strained foreign exchange reserves. Moreover, given that the

Middle East remains a key destination for our migrant workforce,

prolonged instability in the region poses risks to overseas employment

opportunities and to the steady inflow of remittances, which are vital for

external sector stability. Recent market data highlights the scale of the

disruption in global commodity markets. In February 2026, the global

Free on Board (FOB) price of refined diesel averaged around USD 86

per barrel. Following the escalation of the conflict, prices surged

sharply, reaching approximately USD 285 per barrel by April. Similarly,

LNG spot prices, which were relatively stable at around USD 10 per

MMBtu prior to the crisis, increased to about USD 28.28 per MMBtu in

April. Although some moderation has since been observed, procurement

of spot LNG continues at significantly elevated levels. The agricultural

sector has faced similar pressures. The global FOB price of urea

fertilizer nearly doubled in the wake of the conflict, rising from

approximately USD 422 per metric tonne to around USD 850 per metric

tonne. These sharp increases have placed considerable strain on an

18

import-dependent economy, compelling us to manage an unprecedented

external supply shock with limited fiscal space.

Potential Impact on Food Security, Inflation and Remittance

Inflows

Mr. Speaker

32.

The rise in energy prices has a cascading impact across the entire

food supply chain. It increases costs at every stage, including

agricultural production, irrigation, transportation, storage, and

marketing. As a result, food prices may come under upward pressure,

contributing to an overall increase in inflation. When both food and

fertiliser prices rise simultaneously in the international market, the

inflationary impact becomes even more pronounced. In such a situation,

the effects are reflected not only in market prices but also in the daily

cost of living for ordinary citizens.

33.

The Middle East remains the most significant destination for

Bangladesh's migrant workforce. Prolonged instability in the region

may adversely affect employment opportunities abroad, income flows,

and the continuity of remittance inflows. Although remittance receipts

have not yet shown any negative impact, early signs of pressure are

being observed in manpower deployment. For instance, while

approximately 95,000 workers departed for overseas employment in

January 2026, this number declined to around 44,000 in March. If this

trend persists, it may emerge as a matter of serious concern for the

external sector and labour market stability.

19

The Need for Stability, Caution, and Alternative Planning in the

Changing Global Environment

Mr. Speaker

34.

The reality of today's global economy is that uncertainty is no

longer an exception; rather, it has become a permanent feature of

economic management, a 'Neo-Normal'. War, volatility in energy

markets, fluctuations in global interest rates, changes in trade policies,

and disruptions in supply chains - any one of these can quickly place

significant pressure on an import-dependent economy such as ours. In

this context, our objective is to manage the economy in such a way that

minimizes the impact of external shocks on domestic macroeconomic

stability, ensuring resilience and continuity in growth and development.

20

Chapter III: Medium-Term Economic Policy and

Strategy

35.

A review of the country's current economic realities makes it

evident that the economy continues to face a range of challenges arising

from the systemic irregularities, weak governance, and widespread

corruption of the previous fascist regime. However, we firmly believe

that these challenges can be overcome through political commitment,

sound policies, effective reforms, and pragmatic, forward-looking

planning. The Government remains steadfast in its efforts to restore

domestic economic stability, rebuild market confidence, and create new

opportunities for growth and prosperity.

(A) Macroeconomic Stability

Mr. Speaker

36.

Since assuming office, the Government has undertaken a series

strategic reforms aimed at improving the living standards of our people

and restoring momentum to the national economy. We firmly believe

that sustainable development cannot be achieved through the

concentration of opportunities and resources at the hands of a few.

Rather, lasting prosperity must be built on the creativity, hard work,

skills, and productive potential of every citizen.

Mr. Speaker,

37.

Rebuilding the economy in the face of continued global

economic uncertainty, domestic structural challenges, and persistent

inflationary pressures remain one of the foremost priorities of the

present Government. To this end, we have adopted a comprehensive

economic strategy focused on restoring macroeconomic stability,

advancing structural reforms, and laying the foundation for investment-

21

led growth. Under this strategy, the Government aims to accelerate real

GDP growth to 8.5 per cent, reduce inflation to 5 per cent, increase

foreign direct investment (FDI) to 2.7 per cent of GDP, and substantially

raise total investment to 40 per cent of GDP by FY2030-31.

Mr. Speaker

38.

The Government will implement this plan through a three-

phased strategy, which we refer to as the 3R Strategy (Recovery &

Stabilization, Restoration, and Reconstruction for Acceleration). The

first phase, Recovery and Stabilization, will be implemented over a one-

year horizon and focuses on restoring macroeconomic stability and

protecting vulnerable groups from the immediate effects of economic

shocks. Key priorities include strengthening social protection

programmes, improving public service delivery, simplifying business

procedures, and enhancing coordination across public institutions.

39.

A major challenge during this period has been managing the

impact of the Middle East crisis on energy supplies and prices. Through

timely policy interventions, diversification of supply sources, and

targeted fiscal support, the Government has been able to maintain

uninterrupted fuel and energy supplies while limiting the impact on

consumers and productive sectors.

40.

The second phase of our strategy, Economic Restoration, will be

implemented over the medium term, three years, and will focus on

strengthening the foundations of sustainable growth. Priority actions

include reforming the revenue system, increasing domestic resource

mobilization, revitalizing private sector investment, strengthening the

banking and financial sectors, promoting export diversification, and

enhancing human capital development. Investments in agriculture,

energy, and infrastructure will continue to support productivity and

competitiveness.

22

41.

The third phase, Reconstruction for Acceleration, will focus on

transforming Bangladesh into a modern, innovative, and technology-

driven economy and will be completed over five years. During this

phase, emphasis will be placed on developing a highly skilled

workforce, fostering innovation, accelerating digital transformation,

strengthening institutions, deepening global economic integration,

ensuring long-term energy security, and promoting climate-resilient and

inclusive growth.

Mr. Speaker

42.

As part of our broader agenda for economic recovery,

restoration, and reconstruction, the Government attaches the highest

priority to restoring macroeconomic stability. Persistently high inflation

over the past several years has not only eroded the purchasing power of

households but has also undermined overall economic foundation.

While global factors have contributed significantly to these pressures,

domestic challenges, including supply chain inefficiencies, market

distortions,

inadequate

competition,

and

various

structural

bottlenecks-have further amplified inflationary trends.

43.

The Government remains committed to protecting citizens from

the adverse effects of high inflation. Given the import-dependent nature

of our economy, substantial depreciation of the Taka against major

foreign currencies has had a significant impact on domestic prices.

Accordingly, we are placing particular emphasis on strengthening our

foreign exchange reserve position, enhancing external sector resilience,

and promoting greater stability in the foreign exchange market.

44.

At the same time, effective coordination between monetary and

fiscal policies will be maintained while ensuring adequate credit flows

to productive sectors of the economy. We will strengthen external

balances through export expansion, facilitation of remittance inflows,

and prudent management of non-essential imports. Combined with

23

improved expenditure efficiency and sound fiscal management, these

measures will help maintain the budget deficit within sustainable limits,

restore market confidence, and create a more conducive environment for

investment and production.

45.

Strengthening domestic resource mobilization is a central pillar

of our fiscal strategy. As an important institutional reform, we have

initiated the separation of revenue policy formulation from revenue

administration. Going forward, tax policy will be developed through a

dedicated framework supported by professional expertise, evidence-

based analysis, and broad stakeholder consultation. Under our medium-

term revenue strategy, we are broadening the tax base, improving

compliance, and enhancing transparency and efficiency in revenue

administration. Measures are being taken to expand the taxpayer base,

digitize tax registration and return filing processes, strengthen

monitoring systems, modernize VAT administration, improve

withholding

tax compliance, and

introduce risk-based audit

mechanisms. At the same time, taxpayer services are being expanded

and procedures simplified to encourage voluntary compliance. The

Government is also undertaking a comprehensive review of tax

expenditures and exemptions to ensure greater transparency, efficiency,

and accountability. Going forward, tax incentives will be subject to

stronger oversight and clearer justification. Reforms in both tax and

customs administration will strengthen domestic resource mobilization

and enhance the State's capacity to finance priority development

programmes.

46.

At present, the revenue-to-GDP ratio and the tax-to-GDP ratio

stand at approximately 8 percent and 6.8 percent, respectively. The

Government aims to increase these ratios to 11 percent and 9.6 percent,

respectively, by FY2030-31 through comprehensive policy and

administrative reforms. I shall present the detailed budget proposals

relating to domestic revenue mobilization in Chapter VII. Owing to

corruption-riddled and poorly planned vanity projects undertaken

24

during the fascist regime, and the substantial borrowing incurred to

finance them, the country's debt sustainability has come under immense

pressure. This Government is committed to restoring Bangladesh's debt

risk rating from the current "moderate" risk category to a "low" risk

category. Accordingly, we intend to enforce strict fiscal discipline by

enhancing revenue mobilization, maintaining the budget deficit at a

sustainable level, and modernizing debt management. We firmly believe

that the time has come to discard the debt-driven growth model of the

past and build a self-sustaining economy driven by production,

employment, and private investment. To this end, policies will be

pursued to systematically reduce debt dependence and promote

investment-led growth as the foundation of sustainable economic

progress.

47.

The Government is implementing a strategic expenditure

framework to ensure that public spending is efficient, effective, and

aligned with national development priorities. Given the scarcity of

public resources, all major expenditures and investments will be

assessed based on their economic and social returns. Priority will be

accorded to infrastructure, education, healthcare, energy, agriculture,

and

employment-generating

activities,

given

their

significant

contributions to productivity, human development, and long-term

growth. In line with our policy commitments, public investment in

education and health will be gradually increased over time to 5 per cent.

At the same time, future development projects will be subject to rigorous

economic appraisal, cost-benefit analysis, and implementation readiness

assessments to ensure value for money and maximize development

impact.

48.

The Government will continue efforts to improve expenditure

efficiency by rationalizing non-priority spending and strengthening

fiscal discipline across public institutions. Subsidy programmes will be

made more targeted and efficient so that support reaches intended

beneficiaries while minimizing unnecessary fiscal pressures. Essential

25

support for agriculture, food security, and energy supply will be

maintained, while inefficient subsidy arrangements will be reviewed

and reformed.

49.

We are also undertaking reforms to make social protection

programmes more targeted, inclusive, and effective. Greater use of

technology, digital beneficiary databases, and improved monitoring

systems will help reduce leakages and enhance service delivery.

Similarly, technology-based systems will be strengthened in public

procurement, project implementation, and budget management to

promote transparency, accountability, and efficiency. In line with our

national development priorities, public expenditure on education,

healthcare, energy security, agricultural productivity, and employment

generation will increasingly be linked to measurable outcomes and

performance indicators. Through these reforms, public expenditure will

not only address immediate needs but also strengthen the foundations of

a productive, resilient, and sustainable economy.

(B) Enhancing the Investment Climate

Mr. Speaker

50.

Through its 3R Strategy, the Government is placing the highest

priority on improving the investment climate and restoring confidence

in the private sector. Our primary objective is to identify and address the

key constraints facing businesses through legal, regulatory, and

institutional reforms, thereby reducing business uncertainty and the cost

of doing business while ensuring investment security through an

improved ease-of-doing business environment. We are confident that

these initiatives will stimulate investment, revitalize industrial

production, and strengthen the structural foundations for sustainable

economic growth over the medium term.

26

51.

The Government will put forward an integrated policy

framework to promote high value-added industries, technology-driven

manufacturing, export-oriented services, and an innovation-friendly

entrepreneurial ecosystem. Productivity and global competitiveness of

the private sector will be enhanced through greater investment in

research and development, technology transfer, and human capital

development. In addition, a strong capital market, a vibrant bond

market, and alternative financing mechanisms will be developed to

support long-term investment financing. By implementing these

strategies, the private sector will be established as the primary driver of

economic growth and structural transformation in Bangladesh.

52.

The Government is prioritizing deregulation as a cornerstone of

its efforts to consolidate and streamline all investment-related services

under a unified framework. I have discussed this issue in greater detail

in Chapter VIII. Our objective is clear: the State should serve not as a

barrier, but as an enabler of production, investment, and employment

generation. We firmly believe that these ongoing reforms will go far

beyond the simplification of administrative procedures. They will foster

a more efficient and cost-effective business environment, encourage

greater domestic and foreign investment, generate new momentum for

enterprises of all sizes-from small businesses to large industries-

reinforce the foundations of production and exports, and expand

employment opportunities throughout the economy.

27

(C) Financial Sector Reform

Banking System and Financial Institutions

53.

Restoring discipline in the banking and financial sectors and

rebuilding public confidence in these sectors constitute one of the

Government's key medium-term priorities for supporting economic

recovery and sustaining investment flows. To this end, measures are

being undertaken to reduce non-performing loans, enhance transparency

in loan approval and rescheduling processes, and strengthen

accountability in bank management and governance. A risk-based

supervisory framework will be introduced to restore the financial

soundness of weak banks, while recapitalization and management

reform measures will be undertaken where necessary. It is worth noting

that the government is having to spend more than Tk 40,000 crore in the

current fiscal year for the recapitalization of banks. To improve the

effectiveness of policy implementation in the financial sector, the

Government will strengthen the supervisory authority of the central

bank, introduce the necessary legal reforms to eliminate political

interference in banking operations, and ensure that bank governance is

free from undue family influence. International standards relating to risk

management, capital adequacy, and corporate governance will be

adopted to enable financial institutions to become more stable, resilient,

and competitive over the long term. At the same time, greater use of

technology will be encouraged to promote digital finance, fintech

solutions, and innovative financial services across the economy.

54.

Financial inclusion will be further expanded to improve access

to finance for women, young entrepreneurs, and marginalized

communities. At the same time, targeted refinancing programmes will

be strengthened to increase the flow of credit to small and medium-sized

enterprises (SMEs), agriculture, and other productive sectors of the

economy. To broaden financial access and support inclusive growth,

digital banking, mobile financial services, and financing for rural

28

economic activities will be expanded and made more accessible

throughout the country.

Capital Market

Mr. Speaker

55.

As part of the broader effort to restructure the economy, the

Government will implement structural reforms in both the banking and

capital market sectors with a view to building a modern, strong, and

sustainable financial system. To reduce excessive reliance on bank-

based financing, the bond market and other alternative financing

mechanisms will be further developed to support long-term investment

financing. The regulatory framework governing the capital market will

be strengthened and investor protection enhanced in order to transform

the capital market into an effective platform for long-term investment.

In addition to the equity market, priority will be given to the

development of corporate bonds, mutual funds, green bonds, Sukuk, and

other long-term investment instruments. To encourage qualified

companies to enter the capital market, listing procedures will be

reviewed and simplified, while reporting and disclosure requirements

will be revised to make them more transparent, practical, and business-

friendly. Furthermore, the corporate bond market will be expanded and

a framework for issuing municipal bonds will be developed to support

local government financing and urban infrastructure development,

thereby creating alternative sources of long-term financing.

Mr. Speaker

56.

While capital markets serve as the principal platform for capital

formation in economies around the world, this role has remained largely

underdeveloped in Bangladesh, leading entrepreneurs to depend

predominantly on bank financing. A capital market that should have

played a central role in mobilizing long-term capital for industrialization

29

and economic advancement has instead suffered from a lack of investor

confidence. The Government is determined to reverse this trend by

promoting a gradual shift from debt-based investment financing towards

greater reliance on equity financing. To this end, effective measures will

be undertaken to strengthen the capital market, improve market integrity

and governance, and restore public confidence.

(D) Ensuring Energy Security

Mr. Speaker

57.

To support economic recovery and ensure the continuity of

productive activities, the Government considers energy security and

infrastructure development to be among the key priorities of its medium-

term strategy. At present, Bangladesh imports approximately 95 percent

of its petroleum requirements, around 34 percent of its natural gas

demand in the form of LNG, and virtually all of its LPG requirements.

A significant share of these imports originates from the Middle East. In

view of this dependence, and in light of recent geopolitical

developments in the region, the Government has undertaken initiatives

to diversify energy sources and is placing the highest priority on

intensifying domestic gas exploration to enhance energy security and

reduce external vulnerabilities.

58.

To ensure an uninterrupted supply of electricity and energy,

measures are being taken to improve the efficiency of existing

generation, transmission, and distribution systems, while strengthening

the LNG supply chain and related infrastructure. In addition, incentives

are being provided to encourage the adoption of renewable energy

sources. Modern technologies will be promoted to ensure efficient and

cost-effective energy use across the industrial, agricultural, and

residential sectors. Investment in energy and infrastructure will be

further expanded through public-private partnerships in order to

accelerate economic activity and support long-term growth. Through

30

these initiatives, the Government aims to ensure a stable energy supply

and strengthen national energy security over the medium term, thereby

creating a more conducive environment for investment and production.

59.

During the tenure of the present Government, an integrated

strategy will be implemented to develop a secure, efficient,

environmentally sustainable energy system and modern infrastructure

capable of supporting long-term economic growth. Through the gradual

expansion of solar, wind, and other clean energy sources, the

foundations of a low-carbon economy will be established. At the same

time, the national power grid will be modernized through the adoption

of smart technologies and advanced energy management systems, while

the resilience of energy infrastructure will be strengthened to meet

future demand and withstand potential external shocks.

(E) Employment Generation

Mr. Speaker

60.

Guided by the principle of "We Will Work, and Will Build the

Country Together," employment generation across various sectors

constitutes one of the central pillars of the Government's economic

recovery and inclusive growth strategy. When an economy loses

momentum in its industrial and productive sectors, employment

opportunities contract and overall productivity decline. This trend has

been evident in Bangladesh's labour market in recent years. Although

the contributions of the industrial and services sectors to national value

added have increased over the past decade, their capacity to generate

employment has not expanded at the desired pace. At the same time, it

is a matter of concern that employment in agriculture has continued to

grow despite the sector's declining share in overall economic output.

31

Mr. Speaker

61.

The Government is therefore placing the highest priority on

expanding employment opportunities in industry, services, small and

medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), information technology, and modern

agro-based industries. Demand-driven technical and vocational

education and training programmes will be expanded, greater access to

finance will be provided for young entrepreneurs, and employment

opportunities for women and marginalized groups will be enhanced. At

the same time, increased productive investment, the expansion of

export-oriented industries, and the development of a skilled workforce

will help restore structural balance in the labour market over the medium

term. In addition, greater investment in the creative economy will create

new avenues for employment and entrepreneurship. Through these

coordinated initiatives, the Government aims to build a productive,

skilled, and sustainable employment-based economy over the long

term-one that raises incomes, reduces poverty, and supports a more

dynamic and inclusive pattern of economic growth.

62.

The Government attaches special importance to the creative

economy and seeks to develop it as an important source of employment,

entrepreneurship, and economic growth. Specialized zones will be

established to promote the development of arts, music, theatre, film, and

other cultural activities, thereby improving the livelihoods of artists and

cultural practitioners while expanding opportunities for recreation,

cultural enrichment, and social engagement for the wider public. At the

same time, sports will be developed as an important economic sector so

that it can be embraced as a respectable profession, enable Bangladesh

to enhance its presence and reputation on the global stage, and

contribute meaningfully to GDP. I shall present the specific budget

proposals relating to the creative economy in Chapter VI: Sectoral

Priorities of this Budget Speech.

32

(F) Good Governance

Mr. Speaker

63.

In our pursuit of building a 'Meritocratic Bangladesh', merit,

integrity, competence, experience, and professional qualifications will

serve as the principal criteria for all appointments, transfers, and

promotions across the public service. I would like to point out that

government employees have been receiving salaries and allowances

under the same pay structure for nearly eleven years. During this period,

the cost of living has increased significantly due to inflationary

pressures. In recognition of this reality, the Government is announcing

the phased implementation of a new pay structure for public employees

beginning on 1 July 2026.

64.

We firmly believe that these ongoing reforms will extend far

beyond the simplification of administrative procedures. They will

contribute to improving the overall business environment, attracting

greater domestic and foreign investment, creating new momentum for

enterprises of all sizes, strengthening the foundations of production and

exports, and expanding employment opportunities across the economy.

In line with the electoral commitments of the Bangladesh Nationalist

Party (BNP), the path we have chosen-centered on economic

democratization, good governance, private sector-led investment, and

employment-oriented growth-will be reinforced by the measures

outlined in this chapter.

65.

One of the Government's key strategic objectives is to elevate

Bangladesh from its current position as the world's 26th largest

economy in terms of Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) to among the top

20 economies within the next five years. To achieve this goal, the

Government will strengthen the foundations of the economy by ensuring

universal digital connectivity, investing in human capital development,

33

enhancing energy security, and improving infrastructure and port

management. These efforts will be complemented by policies aimed at

increasing private sector investment, accelerating industrialization, and

raising productivity across all sectors of the economy. As part of this

strategy, a comprehensive action plan is being undertaken to increase

foreign direct investment (FDI) from the current level of 0.45 percent of

GDP to 2.7 percent of GDP.

(G) Balanced Regional Development

Mr. Speaker

66.

The Government remains firmly committed to ensuring

balanced and equitable development by reducing economic, social, and

infrastructural disparities across different regions of the country.

Recognizing that different regions possess distinct comparative

advantages, the Government will prioritize economic activities and

industrial development that are best suited to the unique strengths and

resource endowments of each region. As part of this strategy, the

development of Chattogram as the country's commercial capital

constitutes a key strategic initiative. To establish Chattogram as a

regional trade and logistics hub, the capacity, efficiency, and

connectivity of its ports will be further modernized and expanded. In the

northern region, priority will be given to agro-based industrialization

through the development of specialized agro-processing industries,

cold-chain facilities, storage infrastructure, food processing industries,

and logistics networks in agriculturally intensive districts. Furthermore,

a comprehensive development programme will be implemented for the

haor and wetland regions, focusing on agriculture, fisheries, duck

farming, tourism, and biodiversity conservation to ensure sustainable

livelihoods.

34

Mr. Speaker

67.

In formulating this Budget and designing the Government's

medium-term policy strategy, careful consideration has been given to

the recommendations received through a series of pre-budget

consultations with stakeholders from various sectors. Despite the

existing constraints and challenges, we are confident that this Budget

will mark the beginning of a positive transformation in the economy.

Through the creation of a more investment-friendly environment, the

expansion

of

employment

opportunities,

the

promotion

of

entrepreneurship, and the growth of productive sectors, we seek to build

a more dynamic, resilient, and competitive economy. Our vision is to

establish an economic framework in which the private sector serves as

the principal engine of growth, while creating new opportunities for

young people and women to contribute to and benefit from the country's

economic progress.

35

Chapter IV: Supplementary Budget for FY 2025-

26

Mr. Speaker

68.

Considering the overall progress in revenue collection and

expenditure, some revisions and adjustments have had to be made to the

budget for the current FY 2025-26. A brief summary of the revised

budget has been appended as Table 1 of Appendix 'A'.

69.

Proposed Revised Revenue Receipts: Up to March 2026 of the

current fiscal year, 58.7 percent of the total revenue collection target set

in the original budget has been achieved, representing a 6.9 percent

growth in revenue collection compared to the corresponding period of

the previous fiscal year. However, following the assumption of office

by the democratic government, and as a result of the Government's

development-oriented, taxpayer-friendly policies and reform initiatives,

economic activities have gained momentum, which will further bolster

the revenue growth. Considering this trend in revenue mobilization,

along with overall situations, I propose to increase the revenue

collection target in the revised budget for FY 2025-26 by BDT 24

thousand crore from the original budget, setting it at BDT 5 lakh 88

thousand crore.

70.

Proposed Revised Expenditure: In the budget for the current

FY 2025-26, the total public expenditure was estimated at BDT 7 lakh

90 thousand crore. However, up to March 2026, BDT 4 lakh 5 thousand

305 crore has been spent. Government expenditure, particularly the

implementation of the Annual Development Programme (ADP),

experienced a somewhat slower pace during the pre-election period.

Considering this, I propose to decrease public expenditure by BDT 2

thousand crore in the revised budget and set it at BDT 7 lakh 88

thousand crore.

36

71.

Deficit and Financing in the Revised Budget: The budget

deficit for the current fiscal year was estimated at BDT 2 lakh 26

thousand crore. Considering the overall situation of revenue receipts and

expenditure, I propose a deficit of BDT 2 lakh crore in the revised

budget, which is equivalent to 3.3 percent of GDP. Notable that the

deficit in the original budget was estimated at 3.6 percent of GDP. Out

of the total deficit in the revised budget, I propose to finance BDT 1 lakh

37 thousand crore from the domestic sources and BDT 63 thousand

crore from the external sources.

37

Chapter V: Proposed Budget for FY 2026-27

Mr. Speaker

72.

With a commitment to steering the economy towards

development and prosperity, we have formulated this budget framework

by focusing on 10 key priorities. Now I would like to present the Budget

for upcoming FY 2026-27. A detailed overview of the proposed revenue

and expenditure for the coming fiscal year has been provided in Table 2

of Appendix A.

73.

There is no alternative to increasing revenue collection to

successfully implement the country's development plans. For this

reason, various reform measures have been introduced within the

National Board of Revenue to make the tax system more taxpayer

friendly. To simplify revenue collection and ensure the prompt and

direct deposit of revenues in the Government Treasury, the A-Challan

system has been made mandatory from coming 1 July. In addition, steps

have been taken to formulate and implement specific short-term action

plans to reduce tax exemptions, identify areas of revenue leakage, and

rationalize the existing VAT collection and structure. It is expected that

the successful implementation of these measures will increase tax

revenues and improve the tax-to-GDP ratio.

74.

There is immense potential to increase our non-tax revenue

(NTR). To boost such revenue collection, initiatives have been taken to

formulate the "Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) and Non-NBR Tax Revenue

Collection and Management Policy 2026". Under this policy, all

ministries and divisions will identify potential NTR sources, set

reasonable fees, rationalise or update rates every three years, and

explore new sources of revenue. In addition, transparency and

accountability in revenue management will be ensured through

digitalisation, the use of the A-Challan system, and real-time reporting.

38

As part of setting rational fees, nearly 493 rates relating to various

services under 17 ministries/divisions have already been updated.

75.

The government has investments in various state-owned

enterprises, corporations, companies, banks, insurance, and financial

institutions. These investments represent government capital or equity,

against which the government is entitled to receive profits or dividends.

But there is no comprehensive database of the government's equity

investments in these institutions. For this, an initiative has been taken to

develop a complete database of all government investments and equity.

This will help ensure the proper collection of profits and dividends due

against government investments. These measures are expected to

increase non-tax revenue earnings and support the achievement of our

short and medium-term overall revenue targets.

76.

Proposed Revenue Income: Considering these reforms and

initiatives in the revenue sector, total revenue earnings for the FY 2026-

27 have been estimated at BDT 6 lakh 95 thousand crore, which is

equivalent to 10.2 percent of GDP. Of this amount, I propose to collect

BDT 6 lakh 4 thousand crore through the National Board of Revenue

(NBR) and BDT 91 thousand crore from other sources.

77.

Proposed Expenditure: Total expenditure for the upcoming FY

2026-27 is estimated at BDT 9 lakh 38 thousand crore, which represents

13.7 percent of GDP and is BDT 1 lakh 48 thousand crore higher than

the budget of the previous financial year. Of this amount, I propose an

allocation of BDT 3 lakh 16 thousand 75 crore for development

expenditure, including BDT 3 lakh crore for the Annual Development

Programme (ADP), and BDT 6 lakh 21 thousand 925 crore for operating

and other expenditures. We have adopted a plan to gradually increase

the share of development expenditure in the budget. In line with that

objective, it has been proposed to raise the share of total development

expenditure in the fiscal year 2026-27 from 27.27 percent in the current

fiscal year (revised) to 33.70 percent, and to reduce operating

39

expenditure from 72.73 percent in the current fiscal year to 66.30

percent in the upcoming fiscal year. This total expenditure includes BDT

1 lakh 5 thousand crore for interest payments on domestic debt and BDT

22 thousand 5 hundred crore for interest payments on foreign debt.

78.

In the proposed budget, utmost importance has been given to

ensuring social protection for marginalised and low-income groups to

achieve our development goals. At the same time, in allocating

resources for the Annual Development Programme (ADP), priority has

been given to human resource development and education, health,

science, research, and technology which are vital for building a

knowledge-based society. In addition, special emphasis has been placed

on the development of physical infrastructure necessary for investment

and sustainable development. A sector-wise breakdown of the ADP

allocations has been provided in Table 3 of Appendix A.

79.

Overall Expenditure Structure: The overall expenditure

framework, divided into three broad sectors - social infrastructure,

physical infrastructure, and general services - has been presented in

Table 4 of Appendix A. In the proposed budget, a total allocation of

BDT 2 lakh 79 thousand 1 crore has been proposed for the social

infrastructure sector, which accounts for 29.74 percent of the total

allocation. An allocation of BDT 1 lakh 74 thousand 988 crore has been

proposed for the physical infrastructure sector, representing 18.66

percent of the total budget. For the general services sector, BDT 2 lakh

45 thousand 117 crore has been proposed, which is 26.13 percent of the

total allocation. The increased and highest allocation for the social sector

reflects the government's electoral commitment to giving priority to

education, healthcare, and social safety net programmes.

80.

Proposed Budget Deficit and Financing: Over the past few

years, the significant depreciation of the BDT against foreign currencies

has increased expenditure on the repayment of both principal and

interest on foreign loans. As a result, the proposed Budget for FY 2026-

40

27 will have a deficit of BDT 2 lakh 43 thousand crore, which is

equivalent to 3.6 percent of GDP. Although a significant increase in

investment has been proposed in both the social and infrastructure

sectors, the budget deficit ratio has been maintained at the same level as

in the previous fiscal year. The funds for these increased allocations will

be mobilised by achieving revenue targets through necessary reforms in

the revenue sector. Out of the total deficit in the proposed budget, I

propose to finance BDT 1 lakh 27 thousand crore from domestic sources

and BDT 1 lakh 16 thousand crore from external sources. Of the

domestic borrowing, Tk 112,000 crore will be sourced from the banking

system. In the current fiscal year 2025-26, it was Tk 118,000 crore. That

is, we have proposed to reduce borrowing from the banking system by

Tk 6,000 crore in the upcoming fiscal year.

81.

Due to excessive borrowing during the fascist regime, the

country's debt servicing and interest payment costs have risen

substantially. As a result, the budget deficit in the proposed Budget has

also increased. In FY 2005-06, the budget deficit was 2.9 percent of

GDP. By contrast, in FY 2023-24, this deficit climbed to 4.05 percent

of GDP.

82.

Alongside addressing these inherited fiscal pressures, we are

working to restore discipline and stability in the economy. We are

adopting effective measures to boost domestic revenue collection,

reforming debt management, channelling public investment into high-

return sectors, and modernising the project implementation framework.

As a result of these measures, government revenue collection will be

enhanced, the quality of investment will be ensured, and the flow of

money in the economy will be increased, through the multiplier effect,

economic activities will become more dynamic and revenue income will

be increased more in future, which will gradually contribute to reducing

the budget deficit.

41

Chapter VI: Sectoral Priority

Mr. Speaker

83.

I now present a brief overview of sector-wise action plans and

the proposed budget framework in accordance with the Government's

priorities. Detailed sector-wise budget allocations are presented in

Annex 'Ka': Table-4.

Mr. Speaker,

84.

In formulating next year's budget, certain key contextual factors

have been taken into account. Implementing our electoral commitments

with the Government's limited resources represents a formidable

challenge. Accordingly, this budget sets out a priority-driven action

plan. In addition, the global and domestic economic context has been

given particular consideration. Domestic economic conditions -

notably high inflation, slow in economic growth, and a downward trend

in exports - have been weighed alongside the ambition to establish

good governance and to improve the business environment through

deregulation.

85.

Energy security concerns arising from instability in the Middle

East have also been factored in. Overall, in allocating resources, special

priority has been accorded to education and human resource

development, healthcare, skills-based employment, the creative

economy, social protection, agriculture and food security, women's

empowerment, energy security, infrastructure development, local

government and rural development, information and communication

technology, and climate change.

42

Education and Human Resource Development

Mr. Speaker

86.

In this budget, we regard education and human resource

development as the cornerstone of the nation's progress. The future of a

nation is determined by the knowledge, skills, values, creativity, and

productive capacity of its people. The present Government therefore

regards education not merely as a means of obtaining certificates, but as

the most reliable foundation for national reconstruction, higher

productivity, social equity, and an employment-oriented economy. In

fulfilment of our electoral commitment, we have set the goal of raising

education sector allocations to 5 percent of GDP over the next five years.

Since assuming office, work has begun to lay the practical foundations

for our pledges to develop infrastructure, enhance the quality of

education, expand the use of technology in classrooms, and develop

human resources equipped for both domestic and international labour

markets.

Mr. Speaker

86.

Education was among the most critically damaged sectors of the

state structure during the long years of fascist rule. Through the July

Mass Uprising - which carried the aspirations of the youth and has

brought us back to a democratic Bangladesh - we must now build a

Bangladesh for our future generations where students grow into honest,

competent, skilled, and responsible citizens. In meeting the challenges

of the twenty-first century, education is no longer merely a means of

acquiring knowledge. It is, rather, the primary foundation of human

resource development, economic growth, social justice, and national

advancement. Bangladesh's greatest strength is its young population. To

convert this vast demographic dividend into national wealth, our

education system must be restructured so that every student, enriched

43

with knowledge, skills, ethical values, and innovative capacity, can

contribute to the country's development.

88.

Our twin objectives are, on the one hand, to restore discipline,

transparency, and accountability to the education sector, and on the

other, to ensure an environment for students and teachers in which they

can realise their fullest potential through modern education, training,

and opportunity. The Mr. Prime Minister Tarique Rahman, elected by

the mandate of the people, is transforming the education curriculum so

as to cultivate among students ethical values, a sense of social

responsibility, qualities of leadership, and humane character - for he

believes that education is not merely a matter of acquiring knowledge;

it is the most powerful instrument for shaping people and society.

Mr. Speaker

89.

To this end, special emphasis will be placed within the education

curriculum on technical and vocational education, third-language

instruction, sports and cultural development, technology-enabled

learning, and 'Learning with Happiness' joyful education. We want to

build an education system in which students acquire not only academic

knowledge but also real-life competencies such as creativity, problem-

solving, leadership, innovation, and teamwork. We believe that the path

to success is not the same for everyone. We do not subscribe to the

notion that everyone must become a doctor or an engineer. Rather, it is

the responsibility of the state to ensure that every student has the

opportunity to develop in accordance with their own talent, interest, and

aptitude. We wish to build a framework in which a student can,

consistent with their own abilities, preferences, or inclinations, establish

themselves with equal dignity and success as a skilled craftsperson,

technologist, agricultural entrepreneur, researcher, artist, teacher,

businessperson, or in any other profession of their choosing.

44

90.

In the future, instead of infrastructure-centred investment, the

education sector will prioritise: developing trained and skilled teachers;

ensuring skills development and workplace readiness; generating

knowledge through research and innovation; expanding and improving

the quality of technical education; building a technology-driven

education system; developing labour-market-relevant curricula; and

supporting the leadership and character development of students.

91.

The joyful education curriculum will be contemporary,

competency-based, and oriented towards real life, with emphasis on

ethics, values, and character formation. Rather than rote learning,

comprehension, analytical thinking, and application-based education

will be encouraged. Club-based co-curricular activities in institutions -

such as debates, science fairs, cultural events, and literary pursuits -

will be encouraged to nurture the latent talents of students. At the same

time, sports competitions and tournaments from the institutional and

grassroots level up to the national level will be regularly organised to

ensure that every student has the opportunity to participate in at least

one sport. Special priority will be given to expanding the activities of

Scouts, BNCC, and Girls Guides in schools and colleges.

Mr. Speaker

92.

To transform Bangladesh into a skills-based economy, technical

education will be progressively introduced for all students from Class

VI onwards, so that every student has the opportunity to be trained in at

least one market-relevant skill across various fields - including

agriculture, ICT, electrical works, electronics, graphic design, tourism,

healthcare, construction, and the creative industries. Plans are in place

to incorporate a mandatory third language - such as Japanese, Korean,

Mandarin, Arabic, French, or German - into the curriculum alongside

Bangla and English. The Government has already introduced a loan

facility of Tk. 10 lakh for students wishing to pursue higher education

abroad to support third-language learning.

45

93.

Every citizen has the right to education. As part of this, free

education for girls has been extended up to the graduate level. Alongside

this, merit-based scholarship programmes will be strengthened; school

uniforms, shoes, and school bags will be provided for students from poor

families; inclusive education for children with disabilities and special

needs will be ensured, along with the provision of specialised assistive

technology and educational materials. A Mid-Day Meal Programme

will be introduced and progressively expanded across the country to

meet the nutritional needs of students and ensure their good health. In

addition, healthcare services, with particular attention to sanitation and

hygiene for female students and women teachers, will be ensured. To

establish a technology-driven education system, the 'One Teacher, One

Tab' programme will be implemented; multimedia classrooms will be

established; free Wi-Fi access will be expanded; a unique Edu-ID will

be introduced for every student; digital library facilities will be

provided; and students will be familiarised with artificial intelligence,

robotics, coding, and digital literacy.

Mr. Speaker

94.

As part of environmental and civic responsibility, the following

will be ensured: implementation of the 'One Child, One Tree'

programme; inclusion of environmental conservation and climate

awareness in education; engagement of students in canal excavation,

cleanliness drives, and social development activities; participation in

awareness-raising activities on disaster management and disaster

preparedness; and encouragement of students to keep pets. Education

will be directly linked to employment, productivity, and economic

growth. Strong industry-academia connections will be built, through

which students will benefit from apprenticeship and internship

opportunities and will be able to launch start-ups and establish

themselves as entrepreneurs. In addition, industry-recognised short

courses will be introduced and skills development centres established

through joint initiatives between universities and the industrial sector.

46

95.

We are working to transform 'brain drain' into 'brain circulation'.

Initiatives will be taken to engage highly educated Bangladeshis living

abroad - who possess global knowledge, skills, and experience - with

the country's education and research ecosystem. To this end,

internationally recognised credit transfer systems, student exchange

programmes, summer schools, visiting scholar initiatives, and joint

research programmes will be introduced, so that students in the country

have the opportunity to connect directly with world-class education,

research, and professional experience. The Government will give

priority to domestic research and innovation and ensure effective

patronage. Our goal will be to arrive at practical and sustainable

solutions to the country's socioeconomic challenges.

Mr. Speaker

96.

The Government will take the necessary steps to bring about

coordination among the various streams of education that exist in the

country and to effectively implement the equivalence of qualifications.

Improving the quality of education and enhancing the standard of

instruction at every level - primary and mass education, madrasa and

technical education, and secondary and higher education - is our

priority. Our students will be the pride of Bangladesh and responsible

citizens of the world. Through this education system, they will learn

human rights and democratic values, religious and cultural tolerance,

environmental conservation and sustainable development, and the

culture of international cooperation and peace.

97.

We wish to improve standards in science, mathematics, English,

and information technology for madrasa students alongside their

religious

education;

introduce

employment-oriented

training

programmes; enhance their competitive capacity for higher education

and employment; and ensure access to digital education and modern

learning materials. At the centre of quality improvement in education

will be the teacher. Regular training and retraining of teachers will be

47

ensured; teachers' dignity, welfare, and professional development will

be promoted; and special benefits will be provided for teachers working

in rural and remote areas.

98.

The story of tomorrow's Bangladesh will be written by today's

children, adolescents, and young men and women. Their talent, hard

work, creativity, and boundless potential will be the primary driving

force of the nation's forward march. It is the responsibility of the state

to ensure an environment in which their dreams are not halted for want

of inspiration, and their talents are not lost before they have had the

chance to flourish. Under the leadership of Mr. Prime Minister Tarique

Rahman, we wish to build a generation that will not only shape its own

future, but will open new doors of possibility for society and the country

- a generation that will not wait for opportunity, but will create new

employment; that will not merely follow the times, but will lead change.

Mr. Speaker

99.

We propose to increase the allocation for the education sector to

2 percent of GDP in the upcoming fiscal year, with a total allocation of

Tk 1 lakh 36 thousand and 606 crore. In the fiscal year 2025-26, the

allocation for the education sector was Tk 87 thousand and 206 crore,

equivalent to 1.39 percent of GDP.

Health and Family Welfare

Mr. Speaker

100.

Building a healthy nation is the prerequisite for sustainable

development and a prosperous Bangladesh. However, years of neglect,

corruption, political interference, and a lack of accountability have left

the country's health sector weak and dysfunctional - as was starkly

evident during the COVID-19 pandemic and in the recent tragic deaths

48

of children from measles infections. During the fascist era, a large

portion of the expenditure on unplanned infrastructure construction and

procurement of equipment in the health sector was plundered through

corruption - which is why the quality of healthcare never improved.

That is why, today, the country's hospitals are struggling under the

crushing burden of excess patients, ordinary people are denied quality

medical care, and a large number of patients are seeking treatment

abroad, causing a drain of valuable foreign exchange. At the same time,

citizens must bear a significant share of their healthcare costs out of

pocket, pushing countless families into financial hardship and poverty.

101.

To change this reality, the BNP Government's objective is not

merely to build more hospitals, but to transform Bangladesh's healthcare

system from a treatment-centred model to a prevention-centred one. Our

commitment is therefore to place the highest priority on strengthening

primary healthcare across both rural and urban areas, promoting disease

prevention, improving nutrition, enhancing maternal and child health

services, expanding immunisation coverage, ensuring the early

detection of non-communicable diseases such as cancer and diabetes,

and raising public awareness. This will reduce unnecessary pressure on

healthcare facilities, lower the high cost of healthcare for ordinary

citizens, and make it possible to build a humane, modern, and affordable

health system while reducing pressure on the nation's limited resources.

102.

Placing public health at the highest priority, one of the BNP

Government's landmark electoral pledges is to progressively raise total

health sector allocations to 5.0 percent of GDP within the next five

years. Ensuring that no poor family is ruined by the cost of medical

treatment is a responsibility of the state. Our government views

investment in the health sector not as expenditure but as one of the most

important investments in human resource development and national

economic progress. As an initial step towards this goal, health sector

budget allocations for FY2026-27 are being raised to 1.01 percent of

49

GDP - a beginning that will give shape to a people-centred,

accountable, and future-oriented healthcare system.

Mr. Speaker

103.

Consistent with the commitments made in the electoral

manifesto, we have formulated plans to establish one modern primary

healthcare unit in each union and one or more in each ward of urban

areas throughout Bangladesh, and implementation is already underway.

These units will serve as accessible, affordable, and prevention-focused

centres of healthcare for the public. Under each primary healthcare unit,

there will be three community-level health service centres (Community

Clinics), from which trained community health workers will regularly

deliver preventive health counselling, maternal and child health

services, nutrition support, and essential primary healthcare at people's

doorsteps. As a result, ordinary citizens will no longer be dependent on

large hospitals, diseases will be detected at an early stage, medical costs

will fall, and out-of-pocket expenditures will be substantially reduced.

104.

Under universal health coverage, every citizen will be issued a

modern "Health Card", linked to an Integrated Patient Management

System and an Integrated Patient Referral System. Through this, a

patient's prior treatment history, investigations, medications, and

medical information will be instantly accessible at any primary,

secondary, or specialised healthcare facility anywhere in the country.

This will significantly improve the quality of care, reduce medical errors

and unnecessary duplication of prescriptions, and enable patients to

receive faster, more orderly, and more effective services. At the same

time, this digital health system will play a pivotal role in establishing

discipline, accountability, and efficiency across the country's entire

health sector.

50

Mr. Speaker,

105.

To make specialised treatment for complex conditions more

accessible and structured, each district hospital and all associated

upazila health complexes will be developed together as a comprehensive

'Secondary Healthcare Unit'. Under this framework, upazila health

complexes will be strengthened as the primary centres for maternal,

neonatal, child, and reproductive health services, so that the majority of

urgent and necessary maternal and child services can be ensured at the

upazila level itself.

106.

Complex and specialised medical care, including surgery, will

be concentrated at district headquarters hospitals. This will reduce the

need for patients to travel unnecessarily to Dhaka, reducing both the cost

and burden of treatment and making the country's overall health system

more effective, coordinated, and people-friendly. To ease the hardship

of patient transport, the Government will shortly establish a 'National

Ambulance Pool and Emergency Services Network'. The Government

will expand treatment for life-threatening and costly illnesses through a

Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model. Under this arrangement, the

Government will procure specific healthcare services from accredited

private hospitals through Strategic Purchasing, enabling poor and low-

income people waiting in long queues at public hospitals to receive

timely and quality medical care. This will simultaneously reduce the

excessive burden on public hospitals and ensure better health services

for ordinary citizens at affordable cost.

107.

To develop healthy, talented, and productive human resources,

the Government is working towards formulating a coordinated, science-

based, and modern national nutrition programme. To address the high

prevalence of stunting among children under five in Bangladesh, the

Government will implement a comprehensive, multi-sectoral national

programme. Malnutrition is not merely a health-sector issue; it is closely

linked to food security, education, agriculture, social protection, safe

51

water and sanitation, women's empowerment, and public awareness.

Under this programme, efforts will be made to improve maternal

nutrition during pregnancy, prevent malnutrition and anaemia among

adolescent girls, ensure safe motherhood, treat severe acute malnutrition

in

children,

promote

breastfeeding,

raise

awareness

about

complementary feeding, and strengthen food and nutrition education.

108.

Ensuring that quality medicines are accessible to the general

public and that drug prices remain affordable is a matter to which the

present Government gives the highest priority. Accordingly, the work

of updating the National Essential Medicines List is at an advanced

stage. Formulation of a modern and up-to-date drug policy is also in

progress, to ensure that people have access to safe, effective, and

affordable medicines. Bangladesh's pharmaceutical industry is making

a significant contribution to economic prosperity and foreign exchange

earnings by meeting domestic demand while exporting pharmaceutical

products and related goods to markets around the world. The present

Government will continue to provide the necessary infrastructure,

research, investment, and policy support - including for an Active

Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) industrial park - to further strengthen

this industry. The Government is also working steadfastly to build a

sustainable and modern nationwide medicines and vaccine supply

network, to ensure the timely delivery of essential medicines and

vaccines even to the most remote corners of the country.

109.

It is with a deeply pained heart that I must say that, owing to the

negligence and lack of proper planning in vaccine procurement and

immunisation programme implementation by previous governments, a

measles outbreak has spread across the country, giving rise to the

heartbreaking situation of child deaths. In response to this crisis, the

Government acted swiftly and, within its first 100 days, administered

the measles-rubella vaccine to nearly 100 percent of children. This

achievement is a reflection of the Government's commitment to

52

rebuilding the capacity of our immunisation system and to protecting

child health.

Mr. Speaker

110.

To produce skilled, humane, and modern physicians, necessary

reforms will be introduced in the existing MBBS curriculum. To this

end, steps have been taken to incorporate an integrated modular

approach, modern clinical education systems, and the use of artificial

intelligence (AI)-based medical knowledge and technology. Under the

supervision of the Bangladesh Medical and Dental Council (BMDC), an

expert panel has been constituted to modernise and bring the MBBS

curriculum up to international standards. The Government aims to

introduce a new, modern, competency-based, and future-oriented

MBBS curriculum by 2030. The BDS and allied health education

curricula will also be progressively updated.

111.

To make medical and dental education more inclusive and

accessible, student loan and bank loan facilities will be introduced. Plans

are also being drawn up to launch a special bank loan programme for

talented students travelling abroad for higher studies, so that financial

constraints do not stand in the way of any bright student's advancement.

112.

A comprehensive reform and infrastructure development

programme will be undertaken to transform all government medical

colleges

into modern, quality-assured, and education-friendly

institutions. In particular, through the modernisation of academic

buildings, dormitories, laboratories, libraries, hospital facilities, and

training infrastructure at older medical colleges, a safe, improved, and

quality educational environment will be ensured for students and trainee

physicians.

53

Mr. Speaker

113.

Steps have been taken to establish five modern training centres

utilising existing but underused infrastructure under the Directorate of

Medical Education at various locations across the country. These

facilities will be used to conduct mandatory Residential Field Site

Training (RFST) as an important component of community medicine

education, directly engaging medical and dental students and intern

physicians with rural realities and community health systems. This will

strengthen future physicians' practical understanding of the health needs

of rural populations and deepen their humane values and spirit of

service.

114.

A total of 192 unused properties under the Local Government

Division have already been transferred to the Ministry of Health and

Family Welfare. The Government has taken the initiative to

progressively establish these properties as modern primary healthcare

units in order to bring healthcare to people's doorsteps. These centres

will be operated under a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model to

ensure efficient management, quality service, and swift programme

implementation.

115.

To ensure quality and people-centred healthcare across the

country, the Government is giving top priority to recruiting the

necessary healthcare workforce. Steps have been taken to immediately

recruit 5,000 MBBS physicians to fill the longstanding vacancies in

various government hospitals and health institutions. This will

significantly reduce the physician shortage, particularly at the upazila

and district levels, and enable ordinary citizens to receive faster and

better quality medical care.

116.

In accordance with the electoral pledge, the process of recruiting

an additional 100,000 health workers has commenced. With a view to

strengthening women's and child healthcare, community-level services,

54

and preventive healthcare systems, a plan has been drawn up for

approximately 80 percent of total recruits to be female health workers.

New positions for 941 Senior Staff Nurses and 947 Midwives have

already been created to expand healthcare coverage and strengthen

maternal health protection nationwide.

Mr. Speaker,

117.

Our government believes that high-quality nursing education

and training are among the cornerstones of a strong healthcare system.

The Government therefore places special emphasis on improving the

quality of nursing education, modernising it, and aligning it with

international standards. To this end, a specialised Nurse Teacher

Training Centre is being established in collaboration with the

Government of Canada to provide nursing educators with modern,

internationally standardised training. To expand opportunities for higher

education and professional development in nursing and midwifery, a 2-

year MSc in Nursing programme has been launched in 25 government

nursing colleges, and the process of introducing the same in a further 8

government nursing colleges is underway. In addition, a 4-year

Bachelor of Science in Nursing programme has been launched in 4

nursing colleges. The Government is committed to progressively

elevating Bangladesh's nursing education to new heights through

infrastructure development, the enhancement of modern lab and

simulation facilities, the introduction of digital learning systems, and the

implementation of internationally standardised curricula in nursing

education institutions.

118.

The demand for caregivers is steadily rising in many developed

countries. If we can develop skilled human resources to meet this

demand, it will broaden overseas employment opportunities and open

new avenues for remittance earnings. Demand for caregivers within the

country is also growing. A 4-month 'General Caregiver' training

programme has been introduced to create employment for educated

55

unemployed young men and women, with the aim of meeting both

domestic and international demand. In addition, a target has been set to

train 60,000 service providers working at the primary level in the health,

population, and nutrition sector.

Mr. Speaker

119.

The Bangladesh Population Policy, 2012 has been updated and

the Bangladesh Population Policy, 2025 has been published. The

Bangladesh National Family Planning Strategy 2025-2030 is at an

advanced stage of formulation to ensure equitable and inclusive access

to rights-based family planning services, with the goal of achieving zero

unmet need, zero preventable maternal mortality, and zero gender-based

violence and harmful practices by 2030. Family planning activities will

be overhauled in line with this Strategy. The National Institute of

Population Research and Training (NIPORT) will conduct research and

surveys including the Bangladesh Maternal Mortality and Healthcare

Survey (BMMS), the Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey

(BDHS) 2026-27, and the Bangladesh Health Facility Survey (BHFS)

2026-27.

Mr. Speaker

120.

To ensure health security and reduce import dependence, the

Government has taken the initiative to develop the medical equipment

and medical device industry as a priority industrial sector. At present,

the vast majority of medical equipment is imported, resulting in a

substantial outlay of foreign exchange. Yet there is significant domestic

potential to manufacture syringes, blood pressure machines, pulse

oximeters, medical laboratory electrical equipment, ventilators, X-ray

machines, ECG machines, hospital beds, diagnostic kits, and other

medical devices.

56

121.

To boost pharmaceutical industry exports, special fiscal and tax

incentives will be provided to export-oriented firms alongside various

existing customs and duty benefits. In addition, internationally

accredited testing and certification laboratories will be established, an

online licensing system will be introduced, a specialised medical

technology park will be established, and access to low-interest financing

will be ensured. The Government will also accord special importance to

biomedical engineering education, research, and technological

innovation. The Government is confident that, building on the success

of the pharmaceutical industry, the medical equipment sector will

emerge as Bangladesh's new export-oriented growth industry and will

play an important role in healthcare, employment generation, and

foreign exchange earnings.

Mr. Speaker

122.

I propose an allocation of Tk 69 thousand and 409 crore for the

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in the fiscal year 2026-27,

which is equivalent to 1.02% of GDP. In the revised budget for fiscal

year 2025-26, the allocation for this sector was Tk 35 thousand and 477

crore, representing 0.58% of GDP.

Agriculture and Food Security

Agriculture Sector

Mr. Speaker

123.

One of the principal commitments of our government is to

transform agriculture into a key driver of national prosperity. We are

committed to developing the agricultural sector, which is the foundation

of the country's economy and food security, into a self-reliant, climate-

resilient and technology-driven modern system. Under this vision,

57

special priority has been given to ensuring affordable prices of

agricultural inputs, including fertilizers, seeds, and irrigation, in order to

reduce farmers' production costs, as well as to promoting agricultural

mechanization. To ensure fair prices for agricultural produce, we are

placing emphasis on eliminating the dominance of intermediaries and

developing modern marketing and cold storage infrastructure. We have

adopted effective policies to establish farmers not merely as producers,

but as empowered entrepreneurs. Above all, our objective is to ensure

safe food and nutritional security through good agricultural practices

and to achieve the sustainable transformation of the rural economy.

124.

To bring about a fundamental transformation in the agricultural

sector and deliver services to the doorsteps of marginalized

communities, the government has formally launched the Farmer Card

Program from Pohela Boishakh 1433 (14 April 2026). As a pre-pilot for

the 2025-26 fiscal year, 22,065 farmers have been provided with cards

across 11 blocks in 11 upazilas of 10 districts under 8 divisions of the

country. Fish farmers, livestock farmers, and salt cultivators have also

been brought under the coverage of this special card. In the 2026-27

fiscal year, 42.5 lakh cards will be distributed across 100 upazilas, with

plans to gradually provide 'Farmer Cards' to all farmers in the country.

Through this card, landless, marginal, and small farmers will receive an

annual one-time cash assistance of Tk 2,500, along with an additional

10 types of multifaceted benefits as per our electoral commitments. For

the FY 2026-27, I propose an initial allocation of Tk 1 thousand 62.5

crore under the Krishak Card program.

125.

In accordance with the commitments declared in our electoral

manifesto, the program for waiving agricultural loans up to BDT 10

thousand including interest in the crop, fisheries, and livestock sectors

has already been implemented, and an allocation of Tk 1,567 crore 96

lakh has been provided in the current fiscal year for this purpose. As a

result, in addition to a positive impact on agricultural production, new

momentum has been injected into the rural economy. Furthermore, there

58

are plans to introduce agricultural insurance to address risks arising from

natural disasters and to ensure stability in agricultural production.

126.

To strengthen the agricultural sector, agricultural and rural credit

programs will be expanded through scheduled banks. Loans at a 4

percent concessional interest rate for the cultivation of pulses, oilseeds,

spices, and maize will continue in order to reduce import dependency.

At the same time, loan programs at 4 percent interest for salt cultivation

in coastal areas and at 5 percent interest for farmers in hill districts

through Bangladesh Krishi Bank will be continued and expanded. Under

the Agricultural Rehabilitation and Incentive Program, free seeds,

fertilizers, and other input support are being provided. To reduce

dependence on subsidies and ensure cost-effective production, we have

strengthened the agricultural mechanization program. In addition,

efforts to diversify agricultural products have been intensified. At the

same time, cold storage and cold chain facilities for perishable goods

are being expanded. An initiative has been taken to develop a farmer

database to ensure smooth distribution of fertilizers, seeds, and other

agricultural inputs, as well as proper implementation of agricultural

rehabilitation and incentive activities. To maintain the flow of

agricultural credit, interest subsidies will be provided through a

refinancing program.

Mr. Speaker

127.

The 'Voluntary Canal Excavation Program,' originally

introduced by the BNP government, has become a successful social

movement in Bangladesh, which has been relaunched by Mr. Prime

Minister Tarique Rahman. Under this program, the Ministry of

Agriculture, along with other relevant ministries, has undertaken

extensive initiatives. Through this program, pressure on groundwater

will be reduced, natural water flow will be restored, waterlogging will

be eliminated, and the efficiency of the irrigation system will be

enhanced, resulting in increased agricultural production. Furthermore,

59

to encourage eco-friendly irrigation systems, 98 solar-powered

irrigation pumps and 27 solar-powered dug-wells will be installed. The

use of environmentally friendly technologies such as drip irrigation and

aquifer recharge will be promoted to ensure the sustainable use of

groundwater.

128.

To ensure food security, the supply of fertiliser to farmers at

subsidised prices will be continued. Notably, with the assistance of the

World Food Program (WFP), 30 thousand metric tonnes of fertiliser

have been received free of cost from Russia, which will be distributed

for free among farmers as an incentive in FY2026-27. To protect soil

health and the environment, farmers will be encouraged to use organic

fertilisers, green manure, and biofertilisers.

129.

Post-harvest losses are being reduced through agricultural

mechanization and improved packaging systems. The development of

modern storage facilities, packaging houses, cold chains, and other

related support facilities is being actively encouraged in both the public

and private sectors. Furthermore, a specialized cold storage facility will

be established in the Barendra region specifically for mango farmers. To

boost the export of agricultural products, the plant quarantine laboratory

established at the Central Packing House is also being upgraded to meet

international standards.

130.

Agricultural research is being given priority, and new high-

yielding and stress-tolerant crop varieties are being developed every

year. In order to address the impacts of climate change, initiatives have

been taken to strengthen agricultural research for the development of

salt-tolerant and drought-resistant crop varieties. In addition, to create

employment opportunities for youth, initiatives have been taken to

formulate an "Agropreneurship Start-up Policy" and an "Agricultural

Cooperative Policy" to ensure the balanced distribution of modern

agricultural technology and agricultural credit on a large scale.

60

Food Security

Mr. Speaker,

131.

Bangladesh is one of the most densely populated countries in the

world. Although ensuring food security for such a large population is a

highly challenging task, our government remains deeply committed to

this goal. To this end, initiatives have been taken to increase the storage

capacity of food grains at the government level. The revised target for

food grain procurement in FY2025-26 is 38.19 lakh metric tonnes,

which is planned to be increased to 41.29 lakh metric tonnes in FY2026-

27. For digital food management, initiatives are being taken to procure

paddy directly from farmers across all upazilas through the "Krishaker

App" and to provide training aimed at raising awareness of safe food

practices. The total storage capacity of food warehouses in FY2024-25

was 23.16 lakh metric tonnes, which is planned to be increased to 24.50

Lakh metric tonnes in FY2026-27.

Mr. Speaker

132.

To reduce poverty and protect low-income people from the

pressures of inflation, 55 lakh beneficiaries are already being provided

with 30 kilograms of rice per month at a price of Tk. 15 per kilogram

for six months during the lean season under the Food-Friendly Program.

To keep the rice market under control, additional OMS (Open Market

Sale) activities have been launched in 419 upazilas. Under this program,

rice is being sold daily at a subsidised price of Tk. 30 per kilogram.

Furthermore, to facilitate food access for low-income people, the supply

of rice and flour at subsidised prices has been continued through more

than 1,000 sales centres across the country. To ensure transparency, the

development of a digital database for preparing a verified list of

consumers under the Food-Friendly Program is ongoing. Alongside this,

pilot activities have been initiated for the distribution of food grains

61

through the "Food-Friendly Distribution" app. An online monitoring

system has been introduced to monitor food grain market prices.

Fisheries and Livestock

Mr. Speaker

133.

To implement our election manifesto, we have identified the

fisheries and livestock sectors as national priorities. The role of these

sectors is immense in ensuring a full supply of animal protein for the

country's population, meeting nutritional needs, and promoting socio-

economic development. Various development initiatives have been

undertaken to boost the production and export of fish and livestock

products. Our target for FY2026-27 is to produce 56 lakh 35 thousand

metric tonnes of fish.

134.

Emphasizing the blue economy, the government has adopted a

plan to operate commercial vessels for harvesting tuna and pelagic fish

in the deep sea, expand seaweed cultivation, and raise fisheries export

earnings to 1 billion dollars by 2030. Kuakata and Salimpur will be

declared new Marine Protected Areas, and the sustainable use of marine

resources will be ensured through the establishment of a modern fishing

port at Matarbari. To ensure the optimal utilization of marine resources,

the project titled "Improvement of Fish Landing Centre of Bangladesh

Fisheries Development Corporation in Cox's Bazar District" is currently

being implemented.

Mr. Speaker

135.

To preserve the country's fish biodiversity, the Government is

placing special emphasis on the artificial breeding of endangered

indigenous fish species and the conservation of their gene pools. To

ensure the reproduction of fish in inland open water bodies, the

establishment of beel nurseries and the maintenance of fish sanctuaries

62

have already been initiated across all eight divisions of the country. The

Government will strengthen nursery management and develop science-

based aquaculture techniques for indigenous fish species, which will

help revive the production and availability of our disappearing native

fish species.

136.

To protect genuine fishers and farmers, the Government has

undertaken initiatives to open up water bodies, coastal canals, and haor

areas to local fishers and low-income communities under the principle

of "Jal Jar, Jola Tar" ("Those who fish shall own the water"). To

promote sustainable growth in this sector and improve the living

standards of fishers, social protection coverage is being expanded to

bring a total of 15 lakh fisher households under the VGF program,

including newly incorporated households from the haor and Sundarbans

areas. To help fish farmers manage risks, plans have been adopted to

introduce the country's first fisheries insurance scheme and to promote

the mechanisation of commercial fish farms.

Livestock Sector

Mr. Speaker

137.

To meet the country's growing demand for safe animal protein

and ensure food and nutritional security, the Government has adopted

specific plans for the development of the livestock sector. The field trial

of the Avian Influenza and Goat Pox vaccines developed by Bangladesh

Livestock Research Institute (BLRI) has been completed, and these

vaccines will soon be supplied at the field level. At the same time, the

Government is taking measures to ensure an adequate supply of animal

disease preventive medicines in every upazila. We are undertaking

necessary steps to ensure the production and supply of safe and quality

feed for poultry and fish farms.

63

Mr. Speaker

138.

For the fiscal year 2026-27, I propose a total allocation of Tk 43

thousand 335 crore for the Ministries of Agriculture, Food, Fisheries and

Livestock, which is equivalent to 0.63 percent of GDP. In the revised

budget for fiscal year 2025-26, the allocation was Tk 37 thousand 126

crore, representing 0.61 percent of GDP.

Social Security and Inclusive Development

Poverty Alleviation and Social Protection

Mr. Speaker,

139.

Our development vision places great emphasis on ensuring that

the general population becomes an integral part of the economic

mainstream through sustained socio-economic progress. A significant

portion of the total population of Bangladesh still lives below the

poverty line. The absence of an equitable distribution of resources is

primarily responsible for creating this kind of inequality. Our goal is to

ensure food, clothing, shelter, and employment for every citizen in

accordance with the directives of the Constitution. To rapidly reduce the

rate of extreme poverty, the present government has accorded the

highest priority to the social security sector, in accordance with Article

15(d) of the Constitution.

140.

The existing social protection system in the country is neither

sufficiently responsive to contemporary needs nor sustainable in the

long term. Accordingly, our government is committed to establishing a

humane, equitable, and a social protection framework founded on

dignity under which the state will play a responsible role in safeguarding

the lives and livelihoods of all citizens. In this regard, programs will be

implemented following a life-cycle approach, ensuring that every stage

64

of a citizen's life from birth onwards is brought within the ambit of the

social protection system. Guided by the core philosophy of our

government's social protection framework 'Economic empowerment

and self-reliance', we are committed to ensuring the economic freedom

and empowerment of every citizen.

Mr. Speaker,

141.

The signature programme of our government for ensuring social

protection is the 'Family Card Programme', which was inaugurated by

the Mr. Prime Minister within less than one month of the formation of

the government. Its core philosophy is rooted in the principle that "The

family, not the individual, is the fundamental unit of development."

Through the Family Card Programme, genuinely poor households

across the country will be identified and provided with enhanced access

to food security, education, healthcare, and opportunities for self-

reliance. The programme aims to establish an equitable and humane

welfare state by addressing the shortcomings of the existing social

protection system, which currently comprises more than 90 separate

programmes. These shortcomings include a lack of coordination among

programmes, the receipt of multiple benefits by the same individuals

(double-dipping), and the exclusion of a significant proportion of

genuinely poor households from social assistance. By 2030, the Family

Card Programme will be gradually expanded nationwide. To promote

women's empowerment, the Family Card is being issued directly in the

name of the mother or the female head of the household, thereby

strengthening the economic and social standing of women within the

family and society.

142.

As you are already aware, through this card, a monthly

allowance of TK.2,500 is being disbursed directly to the beneficiary's

mobile or bank account via the Government-to-Person (G2P)

mechanism. This rate is approximately three times higher than the

allowance rates under the existing social safety net programmes. In

65

addition, information relating to each household's Family Tree is being

incorporated into the Family Card database. Through the Family Card

Programme, we intend to progressively replace the allowance-based

components of other social protection programmes, and by 2030, we

aim to transform this card into a "Universal Social ID Card" for every

citizen of Bangladesh. During the first phase of the pilot, a total of

60,044 female heads of households are currently receiving their

allowances. In the forthcoming fiscal year, I propose to distribute

Family Cards to 4.1 million women and, for this purpose, to allocate Tk.

14,500 crore in the national budget.

143.

In the upcoming fiscal year, I propose to increase the number of

beneficiaries under the Old Age Allowance program by 100,000, raising

the total to 6.2 million, while enhancing the monthly allowance by 50

taka to 700 taka. Similarly, the number of beneficiaries under the Widow

and Destitute Women allowance program will be increased by 100,000

to reach 3 million, with the monthly allowance raised from 650 taka to

700 taka. I also propose to increase the number of beneficiaries under

the Disability Allowance Programme from 3.45 million to 3.8 million

and to raise the monthly allowance from Tk. 900 to Tk. 1,000.

Furthermore, the number of students receiving educational stipends

under the Disability Education Stipend Programme will be increased

from 81,000 to 100,000. The monthly stipend rates will also be

enhanced by Tk. 100-150, bringing them to Tk. 1,000 at the primary

level, Tk. 1,100 at the secondary level, Tk. 1,200 at the higher secondary

level, and Tk. 1,400 at the tertiary level.

144.

To protect pregnant mothers and newborn children, allowances

are being provided at a monthly rate of TK.850 through the mother and

Child Assistance Programme. In the next fiscal year, I propose to

increase the number of beneficiaries by 1,24,000, bringing the total

number of beneficiaries to 18,95,200. I propose an allocation of Tk.

1,944.70 crore in the next fiscal year for this purpose. In addition, we

have expanded the assistance programme for patients suffering from

66

cancer and five other chronic and life-threatening diseases, increasing

the number of beneficiaries to 65,000. I also propose to raise the amount

of one-time financial assistance from Tk. 50,000 to Tk. 100,000. Our

government remains committed to bringing every citizen within a

comprehensive financial protection framework and ensuring that no one

is deprived of the benefits of development.

Mr. Speaker

145.

The role of senior citizens in nation-building is invaluable, and

our government remains steadfast in its commitment to their welfare.

Accordingly, I propose that citizens aged 65 years and above be granted

full exemption from fares when traveling on government-owned public

transport, specifically trains, and a 25 percent reduction in fares when

traveling on the metro rail.

146.

To modernize and sustain the social protection system, our

government will expand coverage across various social security

programs, increase allowance rates in line with inflation, and establish

good governance from beneficiary selection to allowance distribution.

Furthermore, marginalized groups and communities will be prioritized

within the social safety net. In addition, our government will take

initiatives to make the universal pension scheme more attractive by

improving the management of the Pension Fund and allowing 30 percent

of the total amount to be provided as a one-time gratuity. Furthermore,

the Government will establish a state-funded welfare program for

destitute orphan children and address the weaknesses of the Parents'

Maintenance Act, 2013 to ensure its effective implementation.

Mr. Speaker

147.

The Government remains steadfast in its commitment to

preserving the history and legacy of the Great Liberation War and

ensuring the welfare of our valiant freedom fighters. I propose to

67

maintain the monthly honorarium for general freedom fighters at Tk.

20,000. Concurrently, I propose to increase the monthly allowances for

the families of titled Freedom Fighters, specifically Bir Shreshtha, Bir

Uttam, Bir Bikram, and Bir Protik by Tk. 5,000 across all categories,

restructuring them to Tk. 40,000, Tk. 30,000, Tk. 25,000, and Tk.

25,000 respectively. In addition, festival allowances, Bangla New Year

allowances, medical services, and funeral grants will continue to be

provided. A consolidated list of freedom fighters has been prepared

through the MIS system, and allowances are being disbursed directly to

their bank accounts via the G2P payment system. The state honoraria

for war-wounded, titled, and martyred Freedom Fighters' families are

being seamlessly disbursed through the Electronic Funds Transfer

(EFT) mechanism. Furthermore, the Bangladesh Rural Development

Board is extending loan facilities to support the socio-economic

advancement of freedom fighters. To ensure housing for freedom

fighters, the government has undertaken an initiative to construct 4,730

Bir Nibas residences in the fiscal year 2026-27.

148.

Families of martyrs of the July Uprising are currently receiving

a monthly allowance of 20,000 taka, while injured individuals in

categories A, B, and C are receiving monthly allowances of 20,000,

15,000, and 10,000 taka respectively. I propose to continue these

allocations in the forthcoming budget, while increasing the number of

beneficiaries by 1,857 to a total of 16,513. Additionally, as part of the

ongoing project, housing support programme for the families of those

who lost their lives during the July Mass Uprising and for the families

of July fighters who have suffered permanent loss of earning capacity, I

propose an allocation of Tk. 300 crore in the next fiscal year.

Mr. Speaker

149.

To enhance transparency and accountability within social

protection programs, Finance Division has introduced the Single

Registry System. Through this mechanism, funds are transferred

68

directly to beneficiaries' mobile or bank accounts. The system currently

stores information on approximately 40 million beneficiaries, with the

capacity to verify an additional 20 million citizens. This has

significantly enhanced transparency in beneficiary selection, ensured

verification of accounts, and eliminated duplication in the provision of

benefits. In parallel, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Social

Welfare are implementing the Dynamic Social Registry (DSR), which

will allow citizens to apply directly for social protection benefits from

any location. It will also facilitate scientific assessment of poverty

levels, thereby ensuring accurate identification and selection of eligible

beneficiaries through a data-driven approach.

150.

I propose an allocation of Tk 1 lakh 44 thousand 338 crore for

the social safety net sector in the fiscal year 2026-27. In the revised

budget for fiscal year 2025-26, the allocation was Tk 1 lakh 26 thousand

731 crore.

Power and Energy Sector

Electricity

Mr Speaker

151.

Continuous and affordable electricity is the principal driving

force behind industrial production as well as almost all economic

activities. The cost of electricity generation has increased substantially

owing to the fascist government's unplanned power and energy policies,

alongside widespread corruption, rent-seeking, mismanagement, and

irregularities in the sector. Under the guise of capacity charges,

extensive misappropriation and capital flight occurred within the power

sector. A number of mega projects undertaken during the previous

Government's tenure incorporated unilateral and controversial

contractual provisions, resulting in an excessive financial burden on the

country through power imports and purchases. Excessive dependence

69

on fossil fuels has also been a major contributor to rising costs in the

sector. Due to the gap between generation costs and retail tariffs,

subsidies in the sector are projected to exceed BDT 40,000 crore in the

current fiscal year. Although the country's installed electricity

generation capacity currently stands at 28,919 MW (including imports

and on-grid renewable energy), uninterrupted and quality electricity

supply has yet to be fully ensured.

Mr Speaker

152.

Following our assumption of office, we have accorded the

highest priority to the development of the power sector and have

undertaken initiatives to formulate and implement short, medium, and

long-term plans for electricity generation, transmission and distribution.

Measures have already been initiated to ensure transparency and

accountability in the sector through the prevention of corruption and

irregularities. Those involved in corruption within the power sector are

being identified and appropriate action is being taken, alongside

rigorous monitoring. We have undertaken initiatives to retire inefficient

power plants, modernise them where necessary, and adopt a least-cost

generation strategy. Steps have also been taken to ensure financial

transparency and accountability through a review of capacity charges

and power purchase agreements. Furthermore, the reliability of supply

will be enhanced through comprehensive modernisation of the

transmission and distribution networks and the development of smart

grids to reduce system losses. Special initiatives have been undertaken

to expand electrification in remote and island areas.

153.

To maintain electricity tariffs at a reasonable level, measures

have been adopted to establish power plants through competitive

bidding processes. As part of modernisation efforts, work is underway

to place distribution lines and substations underground in metropolitan

areas. A draft 'Power Sector Strategy Paper (2026-2050)' has been

prepared with a view to formulating and implementing a least-cost

70

power generation plan, integrating SCADA, GIS and AMI systems, and

ensuring an optimal energy mix. To facilitate customer services, the

entire process of new connections and bill payment has been brought

under automation.

Mr Speaker,

154.

More than 40 per cent of the country's electricity generation

capacity is gas-based. As domestic gas reserves decline, electricity

generation has become increasingly expensive due to the import of

LNG. In this context, we shall reduce dependence on imported fuels by

increasing the share of renewable energy and making effective use of

indigenous energy resources. Investors will be provided with support

and incentives for the domestic manufacture of renewable energy

equipment, including solar panels, wind power components and battery

systems. The Government has set a target of generating 20 per cent of

total electricity demand from renewable energy sources by 2030.

Furthermore, there are plans to generate between 30 and 50 per cent of

electricity from renewable sources by 2050. To achieve these targets,

initiatives have been undertaken to strengthen rooftop solar

programmes, conduct wind power assessments in coastal and adjacent

areas, implement large-scale utility solar projects, undertake surveys

and pilot projects for waste-to-energy generation, formulate and

implement a 'National Energy Storage Roadmap', and improve grid

flexibility. Energy audit activities will also be strengthened to ensure the

use of energy-efficient equipment and promote efficient energy

consumption among designated consumer industries.

Mr Speaker,

155.

To meet the growing demand for electricity and ensure quality

supply, the Government is working to increase generation capacity to

35,000 MW by 2030 and expand transmission lines to 25,000 circuit

kilometres. In addition, construction of the 2,400 MW Rooppur Nuclear

71

Power Plant is progressing rapidly. Fuel rods have already been loaded

into one reactor, and approximately 300 MW is expected to be

connected to the national grid by August 2026, followed by 1,200 MW

by January 2027. Overall, our government is committed to establishing

a self-reliant, affordable, uninterrupted, environmentally sustainable

and modern electricity system.

Energy and Mineral Resources

Mr Speaker

156.

The prolonged policy failures, institutional irregularities,

mismanagement and import dependency in the energy sector under the

fascist government have plunged the sector into a deep crisis. During

that period, excessive emphasis was placed solely on the import of

Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) and petroleum products. No meaningful

initiatives were undertaken to explore gas resources onshore or in the

Bay of Bengal, nor to expand refining and storage capacities for

petroleum products. Owing to recent geopolitical tensions in the Middle

East, international spot prices of petroleum products (particularly diesel)

and LNG have risen abnormally. Considering the hardships faced by the

general public, we have provided substantial subsidies to the energy

sector and made only limited adjustments to fuel prices. At the same

time, gas supply has been maintained and gas prices have remained

unchanged.

Mr Speaker

157.

The Government has undertaken a range of initiatives to

strengthen energy security by intensifying oil and gas exploration

activities, increasing domestic production, expanding petroleum

refining capacity and diversifying import sources. We will establish a

strategic fuel reserve system. We are prioritising the exploration and

72

production of natural gas both onshore and offshore. We are also giving

priority to strengthening domestic capacity.

158.

Through the Bangladesh Petroleum Exploration and Production

Company Limited (BAPEX), plans have been adopted to undertake 270

km of geological surveys, 700 line-km of two-dimensional (2D) seismic

surveys and 700 square kilometres of three-dimensional (3D) seismic

surveys during the period from FY2025-26 to FY2027-28. BAPEX also

plans to drill 69 wells and carry out workover operations on 31 wells

using its own drilling rigs. A new Bangladesh Offshore Bidding Round

has been announced to facilitate oil and gas exploration in offshore

areas. In order to attract offshore exploration and production activities

and ensure participation by international oil companies, the Model

Production Sharing Contract (PSC) has been revised while safeguarding

national interests. Nine shallow-water blocks and fifteen deep-water

blocks have been opened for international oil companies, where

exploration activities will be undertaken under production-sharing

agreements. Furthermore, initiatives have been taken to procure two

new exploration rigs for BAPEX to enhance national exploration

capacity. Through the critical mineral exploration initiative, the

Government is also placing special emphasis on offshore gas and

unconventional hydrocarbon exploration beyond conventional energy

resources.

Mr Speaker

159.

Measures are being taken to establish cost-effective and

sustainable infrastructure to maintain energy prices at affordable levels.

To address volatility in global markets and ensure uninterrupted supply

during emergencies, initiatives have been undertaken to develop

'Strategic Energy Reserves' and related storage infrastructure, which

will play an important role in strengthening national energy security and

maintaining regional balance. To further enhance energy security, the

establishment of an additional LNG terminal at Moheshkhali is under

73

review alongside the two existing floating LNG terminals.

Simultaneously, the process of land acquisition and consultant

appointment for a land-based LNG terminal at Matarbari, Moheshkhali

is at its final stage. An action plan is being formulated to supply gas

from the Bhola region to the national gas grid. Installation of prepaid

gas meters is being accelerated to reduce wastage, eliminate illegal

connections and minimise system losses.

160.

To reduce risks associated with imported energy and ensure

continuity of supply, the Government is pursuing a policy of energy

source diversification. This strategy seeks to reduce excessive

dependence on the Middle East by expanding energy import cooperation

with other potential regions, including Asia, Africa and Europe. At the

same time, initiatives are being undertaken to attract new investment

through increased private sector participation, investment-friendly

policies and the expansion of Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) in the

energy sector.

Mr Speaker

161.

Initiatives have been undertaken to ensure maximum utilisation

of the existing 601.50 kilometres of fuel transportation pipelines. To

increase petroleum refining and storage capacity, we have adopted a

phased plan to establish a new crude oil refinery with an annual refining

capacity of 50 lac metric tonnes in Chattogram or another coastal

industrial zone. As part of this initiative, steps have been taken to

establish the Second Eastern Refinery Limited (ERL-2) with a capacity

of approximately 30 lac metric tonnes. In addition, a Smart Fuel

Distribution Monitoring System has been introduced in 2,722 fuel tank

lorries to strengthen monitoring of fuel transportation. Measures have

also been undertaken to operationalise the Single Point Mooring (SPM)

facility for petroleum unloading. To ensure the optimal utilisation of the

country's mineral resources, production targets of 6 lac metric tonnes of

coal and 14 lac metric tonnes of stone have been set for FY2026-27.

74

New projects have been undertaken for the development of the

Barapukuria Second Phase and the Dighipara Coal Field to enhance coal

extraction. We are also working towards the economic evaluation of

valuable minerals such as zircon and monazite contained in the sands of

the Jamuna and Meghna rivers, as well as the digital transformation of

services provided by the Department of Explosives.

Mr Speaker

162.

Considering the importance of the power and energy sector, I

propose a total allocation of Tk 17 thousand 345 crore for the Ministry

in the fiscal year 2026-27. In the fiscal year 2025-26, the allocation for

this sector was Tk 16 thousand 952 crore.

ICT, Telecommunications and Scientific Research

Science and Research for Developing a Skilled Workforce

Mr. Speaker

163.

In the current era, the technologies of the Fourth Industrial

Revolution have emerged as key drivers of the global economy. In this

budget, priority has been given to developing a skilled workforce by

addressing the challenges of automation and the Fourth Industrial

Revolution and by harnessing emerging opportunities. In line with the

Government's Election Manifesto 2026, one of our key priorities is to

foster a science-oriented nation by developing a technology-driven

skilled workforce and promoting interest in modern and employment-

oriented education. To this end, plans have been undertaken to extend

STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) education

to the grassroots level and to align research directly with the demands

of the global market. We have moved beyond conventional research

75

frameworks and adopted the Research to Market (R2M) and Innovate to

Market

(I2M)

approaches.

Through

these

approaches,

the

commercialisation of innovations, technologies and products will be

directly supported. Furthermore, new initiatives have been undertaken

to establish national capabilities in space research, semiconductor

technology, earthquake and seismographic research.

Mr. Speaker

164.

A comprehensive programme has been undertaken to ensure

affordable, advanced technology-based nuclear medicine and healthcare

services at the doorstep of the general people. An initiative has been

taken to establish an online networking-based Integrated Nuclear

Medicine Information System to ensure the delivery of both general and

nuclear medical services through 22 Nuclear Medicine Institutes,

including one National Institute in the country.

165.

Plans have been undertaken to enhance geological research

capacity for the exploration of Rare Earth Elements (REEs) in coastal

and riverine island areas. Sustainable development initiatives have been

adopted, including coral restoration in Saint Martin's Island and the

mapping of offshore wind energy potential through wind flow analysis

in shallow coastal waters.

Mr. Speaker

166.

The Oceanographic Research Institute is conducting research

activities to harness the potential of the Blue Economy. In order to foster

a scientific mindset among the next generation and inspire youth in

space science, in addition to Dhaka and Rajshahi modern Novotheatres

are being established in Khulna, Chattogram, Sylhet, Barishal, Rangpur

and Mymensingh. Plans have been undertaken to further modernise the

76

Novotheatre located in Dhaka. In addition, science centres will be

established in every district in phases. To foster an innovation-driven

and technology-oriented younger generation, the Ministry of Science

and Technology organised the 'Bangladesh Innovation Fair'. A number

of research projects in the fields of textiles, pharmaceuticals, agriculture

and innovative technologies received government grants and financial

support. For the first time, Bangladeshi scientists have successfully

decoded the full genome sequences of indigenous Mirakadim cattle,

sheep and ducks using national capability. Through the Biotechnology

Institute, climate-resilient and high-yielding crop varieties are being

developed using genome editing technology. To address the challenges

of the Fourth Industrial Revolution and prepare the youth for the future,

initiatives have been undertaken to establish specialised laboratories for

Artificial Intelligence (AI), semiconductors, robotics, machine learning

and big data analysis. There is no alternative to research in the

development of new technologies. Therefore, the Government will

continue to provide financial support to researchers through the Science

and Technology Fellowship Trust, with a view to creating world-class

research opportunities both at home and abroad.

167.

In order to harness the potential of the Blue Economy through

fundamental scientific research and the extraction and management of

marine resources, it is hereby proposed to allocate Tk. 100 crore for

research and innovation activities and an additional Tk. 100 crore for

the development of the Blue Economy in the FY 2026-27, amounting

to a total allocation of Tk. 200 crore.

77

ICT and Telecommunications Sector

Mr. Speaker

168. In

the

prevailing

global

context,

the

ICT

and

Telecommunications sector is a sector of immense potential. This

sector has the potential to emerge as one of the key driving forces of

Bangladesh's economy in the coming years. However, at present, the

contribution of this sector to the country's Gross Domestic Product

(GDP) is only 1-2 percent. Through the adoption of appropriate

planning and its effective implementation, this contribution can be

increased to 10 percent within the next five years. In this regard, the

Government is committed to developing this sector as a thrust (priority)

sector through the development of necessary infrastructure, expansion

of wireless and wireline connectivity, development of skilled human

resources, introduction of a One Citizen-One ID-One Digital Wallet

system, formulation of investment-friendly policies and provision of all

necessary support for the development of the digital economy.

169. here is no alternative to affordable and reliable internet for the

development of the ICT sector. To develop it as a thrust sector,

adequate spectrum allocation and fibre-based connectivity are of

critical importance. In order to improve the quality of internet services

and bring them up to global standards, the Government has undertaken

comprehensive Telecommunications reform plans, including the

formulation of necessary policies. To this end, a target has been set to

ensure the rollout of 5G coverage to 90 percent of the population and

to guarantee broadband speeds of 100 Mbps, involving all stakeholders

including mobile operators and fixed broadband service providers. In

particular, in order to deliver affordable high-speed internet to the

78

general population in remote and rural areas of the country, the

Government has undertaken initiatives for network expansion,

including the establishment of a National Fibre Bank. High-speed free

internet services have already been introduced at railway stations and

airports across the country, benefits of which are already being enjoyed

by the people. Over the past four months, the government has provided

4.1 million new 4G mobile connections and 400,000 high-speed

broadband connections.

170. According to Boston Consulting Group (BCG), Bangladesh is

projected to become the world's ninth largest consumer economy by

2030. In order to build an integrated digital state system and a digital

economy, the Government has undertaken initiatives to implement the

concept of 'One Citizen, One ID, One Digital Wallet'. Through this

initiative, each citizen will be able to access various public and private

services under a single digital identity. The digital wallet system will

enable secure and convenient financial transactions, including the

payment of allowances, fees and other charges. This initiative will help

eliminate existing complexities in data verification and interoperability

arising from multiple identity systems. At the same time, this Digital

Public Infrastructure (DPI) will further strengthen data exchange and

system interoperability. As a result, transparency, accountability and

efficiency in public service delivery will be enhanced. Citizens' access

to services will become simpler and faster.

AI, Electronics Industry and Youth Entrepreneurship Development

171.

In the era of the Fourth Industrial Revolution and digital

transformation, the Government has recognised Artificial Intelligence

(AI) as a major opportunity for the country's development and

79

modernisation. Initiatives are being undertaken to deploy AI-based

technologies to address existing inefficiencies and complexities in

public service delivery. This will facilitate faster decision-making,

improved data analysis and enhanced service quality. The use of AI

across various government departments will make administrative

processes more efficient, transparent and timely. Initiatives have been

undertaken to develop smart cities and make citizen services more

people-friendly through the application of AI. In particular, AI is being

integrated into the education system to equip the younger generation

with the skills required for future workplaces. The Government also

has plans to utilise AI in the health, agriculture and public service

sectors. These technology-driven initiatives will open new avenues for

building a technology-driven and service-oriented Bangladesh.

172. Following the ready-made garments sector, Bangladesh's

electronics sector is currently one of the fastest-growing and most

promising sectors. In developing the country's highly potential ICT

sector, the availability of digital devices is of critical importance. By

encouraging domestic production, it will be possible to provide digital

devices to citizens at affordable prices, while also enabling their export

to foreign markets. Through appropriate policy formulation in this

sector, Bangladesh will be transformed into one of the leading global

electronics manufacturing hubs within the next five years.

173. The present Government considers the highly talented and

promising youth population of Bangladesh as the country's greatest

asset and a key driver of development. Special emphasis is being placed

on leveraging their skills and innovative capacities to promote startups,

freelancing and digital entrepreneurship. Through technology-based

training and skills development programmes, young people are being

80

prepared for the global labour market. The Government envisions that

the youth will take the lead in creating new employment opportunities.

New employment opportunities will be created in the country through

the expansion of the ICT and automation-based economy. To this end,

initiatives have been undertaken to formulate a timely and modern

startup policy. Initiatives have been taken to consolidate various startup

funds into a unified startup financing mechanism. One of the key

objectives of the Government is to build an innovative and self-reliant

Bangladesh by harnessing the strength of its youth. The Government

believes that, with adequate support, the talented and creative youth of

Bangladesh will be capable of establishing world-class technology

hubs in the country, comparable to Silicon Valley in the United States,

Shenzhen in China, Singapore or Dubai in the future.

174.

Considering the potential of the information technology sector,

I propose an allocation of Tk 500 crore in the FY 2026-27 to encourage

new entrepreneurs in this sector. This fund will be used as a "Startup

Fund" to support the development of women entrepreneurs, women's

advancement, and young entrepreneurs.

Employment and Skill Development

Nationwide Employment

Mr. Speaker

175.

Based on the principle of "We Will Work, We Will Build the

Nation", the implementation of sector-based employment generation

plans is one of the topmost priorities of the government. Through

comprehensive economic reforms, the government aims to revitalize

sectoral and regional economies and increase both domestic and foreign

81

investment in industry and trade, thereby creating suitable employment

opportunities to secure the future of the country's youth. Our

government's commitment is to create extensive new employment

opportunities across the country, thereby ensuring prosperity and self-

reliance for every family. Through the coordinated efforts of both the

public and private sectors, we will succeed in achieving this target. To

establish a fair and merit-based employment system, the government has

undertaken an initiative to establish 'Employment Exchange' program

at the district and upazila levels across the country. Registered

candidates here will be provided with the necessary support for

appointment to vacant positions in various organizations, based on their

merit and skills. Those who lack the required skills will be arranged to

be sent to appropriate training centres to acquire suitable competencies.

To this end, the formulation of necessary action plans and policy

framework has already commenced.

176.

To address the challenges of automation and the Fourth

Industrial Revolution, the government is undertaking initiatives to

formulate and implement a time-bound action plan aimed at developing

a skilled and capable workforce. We have set a target of creating 2 lakh

new jobs annually in the technology sector. In addition, through

extensive training in freelancing and creative industries at the college

and university levels, we aim to generate a further 8 lakh indirect

employment opportunities. To achieve these objectives, the Ministry of

Youth and Sports has undertaken projects to create employment for the

youth through training in freelancing, mobile servicing, caregiving, and

language skills.

Mr. Speaker

177.

Our government's development journey is not merely urban-

centric. Targeted employment programs will be introduced for

marginalized groups, including illiterate individuals in rural

communities, homemakers, senior citizens, and the long-term

82

unemployed. These initiatives will provide training in poultry and

livestock farming, handicrafts, cottage industries, small business

development, and digital skills, along with access to affordable

microcredit and essential equipment support. Considering the

significant contribution of the informal sector to Bangladesh's economy,

the government will ensure safe working conditions, social protection,

healthcare services, and fair wages for workers engaged in informal

occupations, including rickshaw pullers, day labourers, street vendors,

transport workers, and others. Appropriate training opportunities will

also be provided to enhance their skills and productivity. Bangladesh is

expected to continue benefiting from its demographic dividend until

2040. To fully leverage this opportunity, the government will undertake

initiatives focused on providing quality education, market-oriented

skills development, and employment-focused programs for the country's

working-age youth population. At the same time, the number of older

persons in the country is projected to increase significantly after 2040.

Keeping in view the opportunities and challenges associated with this

future longevity dividend, the government is giving serious

consideration to formulating a comprehensive action plan for the future

welfare and development of the elderly population.

Worker Welfare and Working Environment Development

Mr. Speaker

178.

Our government has adopted a comprehensive plan to

implement a range of effective initiatives aimed at improving the living

standards of workers. In line with rising commodity prices and inflation

in both global and domestic markets, fair wages for workers will be

ensured through periodic reviews of the minimum wage. To this end,

ten priority informal-sector occupations have been identified for the

determination of minimum wages, of which five sectors have been

selected in the initial phase. To ensure workplace safety, an integrated

inspection system will be established through coordinated efforts among

83

all relevant government agencies and departments. At the same time, by

ensuring proper compensation for those killed and injured in accidents

in accordance with ILO conventions, we are committed to establishing

workers' rights and human dignity. The information of all these workers

is being integrated into the Labour Information Management System

(LIMS) database, and this system will be utilized for all benefits

provided to them. To strengthen the legal protection of workers, the

Bangladesh Labour (Amendment) Act, 2026 has been enacted.

Women and Child-Friendly Workplace

Mr. Speaker

179.

Ensuring women and child-friendly workplaces in building an

inclusive and discrimination-free labour market is one of our

government's top priorities. To that end, a "zero tolerance" policy will

be enforced against any form of violence or sexual harassment toward

women workers. Safe accommodation and transportation facilities for

women are being further expanded. In addition, a fully women-operated

and women-managed "Pink Bus Service" is being introduced. Time-

bound national action plans are being adopted and implemented to

strengthen legal measures against child labour, particularly forced child

labour and to ensure an environment conducive to children's

development. To this end, the draft National Action Plan 2026-2030 has

already been formulated. Our government's efforts to ensure a safe and

discrimination-free working environment for women and children will

continue.

Overseas Employment and Expatriate Welfare

Mr. Speaker

180.

Our government is placing special priority on expanding

overseas employment and ensuring the protection and welfare of

84

expatriate Bangladeshi workers. I wish to pay respectful tribute to the

late martyred President Ziaur Rahman, as it was under his leadership

that Bangladesh's very first manpower export program was initiated, a

foundation upon which today's overseas employment sector continues

to stand. We have undertaken various initiatives to expand overseas

employment opportunities and diversify labour markets. To achieve this

goal, planned measures will be taken to expand overseas employment,

provide loans on easy terms, ensure risk-free migration, and establish

good governance in migration management. To ensure the overall

welfare of expatriate workers, the government is introducing a dedicated

'Probashi Card', which will store the worker's personal information,

skills, and terms of employment. The card will be linked to a bank

payment gateway to make remittance transfers easier, faster, and more

secure. In addition, the card will be connected to expatriate welfare

services, insurance, banking facilities, and emergency assistance. The

distribution of the 'Probashi Card' among expatriates will begin on a

phased basis from the fiscal year 2026-27.

181.

The government is placing special emphasis on expanding

existing labour markets while simultaneously creating new ones. As

alternative labour markets, we have already taken initiatives to sign

bilateral agreements with Russia, Portugal, Romania, Brazil, Greece,

Serbia, and North Macedonia. Additionally, after remaining closed for

a long time, we have begun the process of reopening labour markets in

Malaysia, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, and Kuwait.

182.

To build the confidence of foreign employers and ensure quality

standards, a robust Skill Verification Program will be introduced. Under

this initiative, each worker's skills, experience, and certifications will be

verified, and a Smart Skill Bank (database) will be developed. Verified

workers will be issued internationally recognized digital certificates,

enabling foreign employers to directly recruit quality-assured skilled

workers. To strengthen technical and vocational training capacity,

practical projects for upgrading equipment and constructing new

85

facilities will be implemented from FY2026-27. In government

technical institutions, including polytechnic institutes, TTCs, and

BTEB, 7,500 domestic trainers will be engaged alongside 1,000 foreign

expert trainers. In addition, 1,000 language instructors and native

speakers will be recruited to promote foreign language education.

Furthermore, a 'Foreign Language E-Learning Centre' and a 'Migration

Market Research Institute' under the Ministry of Expatriates' Welfare

and Overseas Employment will be established.

183.

'Bangladesh Support Centres' will be established at embassies in

major Bangladeshi worker-destination countries to protect workers in

distress abroad. These centres will provide rescue operations for

imprisoned, abused, or deceived workers, assist in finding new

employment, offer legal aid in disputes with employers, and undertake

various social protection and rehabilitation projects for returning

migrants. The process of repatriating the mortal remains of Bangladeshi

migrant workers who die abroad will be simplified to ensure their

dignified return to the country. The migration process has been fully

digitized through the Overseas Employment Platform (OEP). To

develop a skilled workforce, initiatives have been undertaken to

strengthen the activities of the existing 110 Technical Training Centres

(TTCs) at the district and upazila levels, as well as to construct 50 new

TTCs in an additional 50 upazilas. Under the project titled "Providing

Driving Training for Employment at Home and Abroad (1st Revised)",

training is currently being provided to 1 lakh 2 thousand and 400

individuals to develop them as skilled drivers, thereby creating

employment opportunities in various countries in Europe, Japan, and the

Middle East. Through the Probashi Kallyan Bank, the provision of loans

of up to Tk. 1 million to overseas-bound workers on easy terms will

continue, and the scope of this program will be expanded.

86

Increasing Remittance Inflows

Mr. Speaker

184.

In March 2026, just one month after our government assumed

office, monthly remittance inflows from expatriate Bangladeshis

reached USD 3.75 billion, the highest ever recorded in a single month

in the nation's history. This strong remittance performance reflects the

confidence and trust that expatriate Bangladeshis have placed in our

democratic government. We expect this positive trend to continue in the

coming years. To sustain the growth of remittance inflows, the

government is encouraging the use of formal channels for remittance

transfers and will continue the existing 2.5 per cent cash incentive for

remittances sent through legal channels.

Skill Development

Mr. Speaker

185.

The government is undertaking comprehensive plans to enhance

occupation-based skills in line with the demands of both domestic and

foreign labour markets. We have begun introducing sector-specific

courses and curricula for areas that are in high demand abroad. We are

strengthening

market-based

training,

curriculum

development,

certification, accreditation, and quality control.

186.

The National Skills Development Authority (NSDA) is currently

responsible for formulating policy strategies for skills development,

designing training curricula, and overall coordination of human resource

skills development across the country. Furthermore, to transform the

country's large population into a productive workforce, funding for

training program implementation is being allocated from the National

Human Resource Development Fund (NHRDF), established under the

Finance Division, and this support will continue. In addition, to enhance

87

the productivity and global competitiveness of priority and emerging

industries, the government is implementing the 'Skills for Industry

Competitiveness and Innovation Program' (SICIP) under the Finance

Division. Under this program, approximately 2,20,000 individuals are

being provided with market driven intermediate to advanced level skills

training, and employment is being ensured for at least 65 percent of the

trained individuals

Development of a Creative Economy

Mr. Speaker

187.

Although the creative industry is a promising sector of our

economy, it has never been given due importance. In fulfillment of our

government's electoral commitments, we are giving special priority to

the development of the creative economy. Our goal is to unlock the vast

economic potential of the country's creative industries and integrate

them into the mainstream economy. We believe that this promising

sector can make a significant contribution as an investment in human

resource development, national branding, and future welfare. To ensure

its sustainable development, we have undertaken initiatives to foster

coordinated action between the public and private sectors. In this regard,

and in line with the Government's electoral commitments, the relevant

ministries, divisions, and agencies are formulating time-bound short-,

medium-, and long-term action plans.

Mr. Speaker

188.

Establishment of Creative Hubs at the national and regional

levels is essential for the development of the creative economy. These

hubs will feature cultural venues, bookstores (with reading facilities),

cineplexes, small-scale cafeterias, and dedicated spaces for showcasing

and marketing of specialty products unique to the respective regions. A

88

10-year investment strategy and time-bound action plan are being

formulated to develop regional creative hubs across the country. A

feasibility assessment is being undertaken on an urgent basis with a view

to expediting the establishment of a world-class Central Creative Hub

on 160 acres of land in Purbachal under a Public-Private Partnership

(PPP) model. Efforts are also underway to assess the feasibility of

establishing Creative Hubs on unused land at Karwan Bazar, adjacent to

the Office of the Survey General in Tejgaon, and on vacant industrial

plots under BSCIC, following a review of their current status. In

addition, initiatives are being taken to establish Creative Hubs at the

divisional, district, and upazila levels, as well as within the premises of

the Bangladesh Shishu Academy and Bangladesh Shilpakala Academy.

Innovation Hubs have already been established in engineering and

technology universities. Furthermore, steps have been taken to

formulate a roadmap for gradually establishing Innovation Hubs in

universities and undergraduate colleges across the country.

Mr. Speaker

189.

The Government is placing special emphasis on the

identification and design development of creative economy-based

products. As part of the Government's 'One-Village, One-Product'

initiative, a range of creative economy products will be identified,

including handloom products, pottery, weaving products, shital pati

(traditional reed mats), shataranji, wooden toys, handmade jewellery,

terracotta products, and many others. To support the development of

creative products and enhance design standards, a 'National Pool of

Designers' comprising leading local designers is being established.

Furthermore, initiatives are being undertaken to modernize and upgrade

the BSCIC Design Centre to international standards and global

benchmarks through the implementation of a project in collaboration

with universities and renowned fashion designers.

89

190.

The Government has undertaken initiatives to implement special

programs for the development of cultural tourism through the

restoration of cultural heritage, regionally rich traditions, and heritage

buildings. In the initial phase, two pilot projects based on 2-3 themes

will be implemented for the restoration of heritage structures and for the

organization of international festivals. Efforts are also underway to

identify the required technical expertise for heritage restoration and the

hosting of international events. To nurture the talents of the younger

generation, necessary initiatives have been taken to modernize and

expand national-level traditional competitions such as "Notun Kuri" and

"Notun Kuri Sports." Furthermore, initiatives have been undertaken to

develop a monthly and thematic national and regional festival calendar,

incorporating diverse and heritage-rich events such as national festivals

(e.g., winter pitha festivals), cultural festivals (e.g., Baul festivals),

regional festivals (e.g., Jamaai Mela in northern Bangladesh), and other

thematic events including river- and civilization-based heritage

celebrations.

Mr. Speaker

191.

The Government is placing special emphasis on the development

of eco-tourism through the advancement of the tourism sector. We have

undertaken extensive initiatives to this end. A specialized international-

standard training institute will be established to enhance the global

competitiveness and skills of professionals in the tourism sector. To

ensure the international recognized training standards across tourism-

related trades, including culinary arts, an International Hospitality

Benchmark will be introduced. Arrangements are also being made to

ensure internationally recognized certification for trainees in the tourism

sector based on global standards set by reputed international

organizations. Furthermore, a timely and integrated 'Tourism Master

Plan' will be finalized soon, incorporating the overall potential,

diversity, and modern creative themes of the tourism sector.

90

192.

The Government is providing necessary support to strengthen

the global marketing of creative products. Active support will be

provided to Bangladeshi content creators and companies in this sector

to help them enter international markets. Initiatives have been

undertaken to launch a national brand and establish an appropriate

institutional framework. A national brand titled "Created in

Bangladesh" will be launched to showcase the country's creative

potential in international festivals and markets. We have also plan to

provide extensive support to theatre and cultural heritage. For the

development of the film industry and active participation in OTT

platforms, internationally standardized, technologically advanced

studios will be established. Furthermore, a performance-based grant

scheme will be introduced to provide financial support to new

entrepreneurs and promote export-ready commercial projects active in

this sector.

Mr. Speaker

193.

The Government is undertaking multifaceted strategies to

enhance the contribution of various sectors of the creative economy,

with the aim of increasing its share to 1.5 percent of GDP and generating

500,000 new jobs in this sector. Furthermore, initiatives are being

undertaken to integrate rural artisans into the global value chain, support

improvements in product quality and design diversification, and bring

them into the mainstream of financing and development processes.

194.

I propose an initial allocation of Tk 300 crore in the fiscal year

2026-27 for the development of the creative economy sector. In

addition, a further Tk 500 crore will be mobilized from the Corporate

Social Responsibility (CSR) sector of the Bangladesh Bank.

91

Development of Sports

Mr. Speaker,

195.

The sports sector will be developed not merely as a source of

entertainment, but as a full-fledged economic sector where sports,

events, media, merchandise, tourism, and services together generate

income, employment, and investment opportunities. In line with the

declaration of the Mr. Prime Minister, the "Notun Kuri Sports" program

has already been launched, through which scholarships will be provided

to talented sports students aged 12-14 years. The program includes eight

sports: football, cricket, kabaddi, athletics, badminton, chess,

swimming, and martial arts. Under "Notun Kuri Sports," a total of

168,622 players have registered from across the country, including

121,492 boys and 47,130 girls. For this purpose, I propose an allocation

of Tk 200 crore in the FY 2026-27 budget.

196.

Planned and effective measures are being undertaken with the

goal of enabling Bangladesh to secure a recognized position on the

global sports map in several disciplines by 2030. To establish sports as

a profession, sports allowances have already been provided to 300

athletes. We have undertaken an initiative to construct Sports Villages

in all 64 districts, and as part of this initiative, preliminary designs for

Sports Villages have already been prepared in 10 districts. In addition,

initiatives have been taken to strengthen "sports diplomacy" in order to

enhance international cooperation. Regular sports competitions and

tournaments will be organized at various levels to ensure that every

student has the opportunity to participate in at least one sport.

92

Investment, Industry and Trade

Mr. Speaker,

197.

Over the past years, although we have heard ambitious promises

of high growth, mega projects and digitalization, in reality we have

witnessed stagnation in investment, sluggish industrialization and the

absence of the expected level of employment generation. At the same

time, investors have suffered from a lack of confidence, while the

absence of policy predictability and complex approval procedures have

discouraged investment. This year's budget is the budget that breaks that

deadlock.

198.

Visible measures have been undertaken to improve the Cost of

Doing Business and Ease of Doing Business in order to achieve the

country's economic prosperity. Giving priority to deregulation policies,

the present government has adopted several initiatives to create an

effective business environment, promote investment, accelerate

economic growth and enhance competitiveness. To ensure seamless

coordination among various investment promotion agencies, an

initiative has been taken to develop an interactive website. Preliminary

initiatives have been undertaken to map all investment-related services

on a sector-wise basis, streamline and fully digitalise them and integrate

them with the BIDA One-Stop Service (BIDA-OSS) platform. To

ensure Ease of Doing Business, BanglaBiz has been launched as a single

digital platform for uninterrupted business approval services, aimed at

providing investors with faster, predictable, coordinated and transparent

government services. Further details in this regard have been presented

in Chapter Eight. To attract Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), the

government has published an investment heat map highlighting 19

promising sectors.

93

Mr. Speaker,

199.

The Bangladesh Export Processing Zones Authority (BEPZA)

is currently operating industrial activities in 8 Export Processing Zones

(EPZs) and 2 Economic Zones (EZs). Through improved infrastructure,

investment-friendly policies and efficient management, these zones

have achieved notable success in industrialisation, employment

generation and foreign exchange earnings. To ensure balanced regional

development across the country, work is underway to establish new

EPZs in Patuakhali and Jashore districts. Once operational, the

Patuakhali EPZ is expected to create employment opportunities for

nearly one lakh people, while the Jashore EPZ is expected to generate

employment for around one lakh and fifty thousand people. In addition,

the establishment of Rangpur EPZ in Gaibandha district and Sirajganj

EPZ in Sirajganj district is currently in the pipeline.

200.

The One-Stop Service Centre of the Bangladesh Economic

Zones Authority (BEZA) currently provides 125 services under 28

categories, of which 60 services have already been brought under online

platforms. Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) have been prepared

for 88 services. Initiatives have been undertaken to ensure

environmentally sustainable industrialisation in the zones in line with

the Green and Resilient Economic Zone (GREZ) guidelines. Regular

monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities have been strengthened to

ensure the maximum possible social return on public investment. To

address the challenges of climate change, environmentally friendly

renewable energy facilities, including solar power systems and Central

Effluent Treatment Plants (CETP) are being established in the economic

zones. In order to reduce the pressure of Dhaka-Chattogram-centric

industrialisation and promote balanced regional development alongside

local poverty reduction, work has commenced on establishing economic

zones in districts such as Kurigram, Nilphamari, Chandpur and Kushtia.

94

Mr. Speaker,

201.

Considering the changing global trade environment and the

possible reduction of duty-free and quota-free facilities following

Bangladesh's graduation from the Least Developed Country (LDC)

category, the government is undertaking necessary initiatives to

preserve Bangladesh's competitiveness in global trade. In this context,

efforts are underway to conclude trade and investment partnership and

cooperation agreements with potential partner countries-such as Free

Trade Agreements (FTA), Preferential Trade Agreements (PTA) and

Economic Partnership Agreements (EPA)- in line with regional trade

arrangements.

Mr. Speaker,

202.

The ready-made garments (RMG) sector is recognised as one of

the key pillars of Bangladesh's exports and overall economy. Nearly 82

percent of the country's export earnings are generated from this sector.

To reduce excessive dependence on a single sector, the government has

undertaken initiatives to diversify export products. Alongside ready-

made garments, initiatives are being taken to promote Bangladeshi

handicrafts, home decor items, jute products, natural cosmetics, toys and

baby products in international markets. To expand exports beyond the

ready-made garments sector and support export-oriented industries, we

have provided facilities for the import of raw materials and intermediate

goods against bank guarantees and under duty-free customs bonded

arrangements for sectors such as food processing, light engineering,

furniture, electronics, steel products, plastic goods and leather products.

In addition, opportunities will be provided for all promising export-

oriented sectors-including agricultural products, light engineering,

pharmaceuticals, electronics, gold and diamonds- to import goods under

customs bonded facilities or against bank guarantees on a duty-free

basis.

95

203.

These policy supports are expected to accelerate efforts toward

product diversification by reducing dependence on a single export

product. At the same time, initiatives are being undertaken to diversify

export markets by reducing reliance on traditional export destinations.

Priority is being given to Latin America, Africa, Central Asia, the

Middle East and various European countries as emerging export

destinations. To facilitate trade, services such as the issuance of

Electronic Certificates of Origin (CoO) through the Business Single

Window (BSW) platform and participation in international trade fairs

are being provided online for exporters. In addition, an Interactive

Exporters Database has been developed to assist sector-based exporters

in identifying and connecting with foreign buyers.

Mr. Speaker,

204.

Initiatives have been undertaken to modernise existing laws and

policies to support the development of safe shipbreaking and

shipbuilding

industries

through

modern

and

environmentally

sustainable management practices and to ensure safe and eco-friendly

ship recycling by implementing green ship recycling practices. Policy

support is being provided for the production and marketing of energy-

efficient and environmentally friendly electric bikes and scooters (EVs)

in the country. The SME Foundation has undertaken initiatives

including the development of service platforms, updating SME cluster

mapping, launching the "Youth Entrepreneurship for Students and

Startup"

programme

and

expanding

financial

inclusion

for

entrepreneurs in marginalised areas. Under targeted support

programmes for cottage, micro, small and medium enterprises

(CMSMEs), initiatives are being taken to create new entrepreneurs

through mentorship, provide technical and skill-based training to

existing entrepreneurs, establish a central entrepreneurs' database and

extend demand-based loan support. Support is also being provided for

exports, designing, branding and access to domestic and international

marketplaces through dedicated sales platforms. Initiatives have been

96

undertaken to ensure rapid industrialisation in unused BSCIC plots

across the country. In addition, initiatives are being undertaken for the

infrastructural

development

of

existing

industrial

areas

and

enhancement of industrial park capacity, adoption of investment-

friendly policies, diversification of exports, reduction of trade deficits

and provision of financing and incentives to the industrial sector.

Through the National Green Industrial Policy, incentives are being

introduced to promote energy-efficient technologies, waste-to-resource

production and low-carbon industrialisation in order to develop green

industries.

205.

In order to provide loans on easy terms and through a

reimbursement mechanism to the domestic agriculture sector, cottage

and small industries, SMEs and sick and closed industrial enterprises,

Bangladesh Bank has announced a Tk. 60,000 crore Stimulus Package-

2026. Of this amount, Tk. 41,000 crore will be provided through a

refinancing fund, while Tk. 19,000 crore will come from Bangladesh

Bank's own resources. The package consists of the following five

components:

I.

Tk. 20,000 crore for reopening closed industries and

supporting the service sector;

II.

Tk. 10,000 crore for agriculture and rural economic

activities;

III.

Tk. 5,000 crore for the CMSME sector;

IV.

Tk. 3,000 crore for export diversification; and

V.

Tk. 3,000 crore to develop North Bengal as an agricultural

hub.

206.

Through these initiatives, more than 2.5 million new jobs will be

created directly and indirectly. In addition to providing working capital

support, the government will also offer a 6 percent interest subsidy to

facilitate the expansion of production activities. As a result, the effective

borrowing cost for entrepreneurs under this package will be less than

97

half of the prevailing market-based interest rate. This is expected to

strengthen the competitiveness of the industrial sector, encourage

investment and play an important role in increasing credit flow to the

private sector. This initiative represents a significant step towards

fulfilling the government's electoral commitment to expanding private

sector credit.

Mr. Speaker,

207.

At the same time, to support the development of the SME sector,

I propose an allocation of Tk. 2,000 crore in FY2026-27 for disbursing

loans on easy terms through IDCOL, BIFFL and the SME Foundation

under the refinancing scheme for this sector.

Local Government and Rural Development

Local Government

Mr. Speaker,

208.

The construction and maintenance of rural roads, bridges and

culverts are playing a vital role in strengthening the rural economy and

market systems. Therefore, in the upcoming fiscal year, we have

undertaken programmes to improve connectivity and strengthen disaster

resilience through the development of roads, bridges, growth centres

and cyclone shelters. Activities are being strengthened through local

government institutions to ensure safe drinking water supply, universal

sanitation coverage, reduction of waterlogging and environmentally

sustainable water management. Ahead of the monsoon season, canal re-

excavation, drain rehabilitation and drainage system improvements have

been strengthened to mitigate waterlogging in city corporations and

municipalities. Initiatives are also being taken to improve urban roads

and drainage systems, restore canals and introduce modern waste

98

management systems, which will contribute to improving the quality of

urban life.

209.

To achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the

relevant

government

agencies

are

implementing

coordinated

programmes in infrastructure, water supply and sanitation. Through the

development of rural roads and market infrastructure, along with the

construction of climate-resilient infrastructure, nearly 93 percent of the

rural population currently has access to all-weather roads throughout the

year, which will gradually be expanded to 100 percent. Meanwhile,

measures are being undertaken to reduce dependence on groundwater

by increasing the use of surface water and establishing water treatment

plants to ensure universal access to safe water supply.

210.

In line with the government's electoral commitments, plans

have been undertaken to implement various programmes through the

local government system to generate employment, alleviate poverty and

ensure good governance. Digitalisation initiatives for services provided

by Union Parishads, Upazila Parishads and local administration have

been expanded. Efforts are also being strengthened to support social

protection and prevent child marriage through improved birth and death

registration services, while initiatives have been taken to address the

existing challenges in this area.

Rural Development

Mr. Speaker,

211.

Most of the current government's development plans for the

next five years are centred on rural Bangladesh. As the majority of the

country's people live in villages, our primary objective is to make rural

communities self-reliant. For FY2026-27 and the medium term, we

have adopted an integrated action plan to implement poverty alleviation

and

employment-generation

programmes,

promote

women

99

entrepreneurship and strengthen financial inclusion, as well as enhance

the skills of small and marginal farmers, women and youth. To this end,

training, research and advisory services are being expanded through the

Rural Development Academy, while programmes are being

implemented to develop women's skills and create women

entrepreneurs in 200 upazilas, alongside ensuring sustainable financial

inclusion for marginalised communities through cooperatives. At the

same time, easier access to credit, reforms in microcredit and women

entrepreneur loan schemes and the provision of collateral-free loans are

expanding self-employment opportunities, income generation and agro-

processing activities for marginal farmers and women.

212.

In order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

and implement the Electoral Manifesto 2026, priority has been given to

good governance, entrepreneurship development, agriculture and food

security, climate-resilient development and inclusive growth in the rural

development and cooperative sector. At the same time, steps are being

taken to accelerate inclusive and sustainable growth through the

expansion of digital services, greater financial inclusion for small and

marginal farmers, tree plantation programmes, environmental

conservation and skill development initiatives for women and youth.

Cooperative-based activities are also being further strengthened to

promote rural employment and self-employment opportunities.

Mr. Speaker,

213.

I propose an allocation of Tk. 41 thousand 352 crore for Local

Government and Rural Development in FY2026-27.

100

Communication Infrastructure

Mr. Speaker,

214.

The government is working to develop a safe, modern,

technology-driven and environmentally sustainable road network.

During the current fiscal year, activities are ongoing under 106

development projects to develop national and regional highways,

upgrade key economic corridors to four lanes, enhance the efficiency of

the freight transportation system and strengthen axle load control and

road safety. Activities under the Bangladesh Road Safety Project, based

on the "Safe System Approach" to accident prevention, have been

resumed. For FY2026-27 and the medium term, we have adopted

various action plans to establish an integrated, modern and sustainable

road and public transport system. Initiatives have been undertaken to

enact the Metropolitan Transport Authority Act, introduce metro rail-

based feeder services and adopt transit-oriented development plans. In

addition, initiatives have been taken to prepare technical manuals,

promote the use of electric vehicles, introduce an automated fitness

certification system and provide training for nearly 5,50,000

professional drivers.

Mr. Speaker,

215.

The government remains firmly committed to ensuring a

smooth and uninterrupted road communication system across the

country. In particular, roads that have long remained neglected and

deteriorated are being brought under rapid repair and renovation

programmes. To establish a nationwide network of nearly 3,000

kilometres of national expressways, identification and feasibility studies

of potential corridors are currently underway. Moreover, initiatives have

been undertaken to develop a multimodal transport system integrating

road, rail, water and air transport, alongside the use of smart

technologies for axle load control and the establishment of new control

101

stations. Efforts are also ongoing to strengthen road safety, reduce traffic

congestion in Dhaka through the construction of ring roads and radial

roads, promote environmentally sustainable infrastructure development

and expand digital toll collection systems. In addition, initiatives have

been taken to rationalise bus routes, introduce electric buses and develop

skilled drivers, which will contribute to building a more modern, safe

and efficient transport system.

216.

To achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the

government has adopted short, medium and long-term plans for the

development of the transport sector. Transparency and efficiency in

public transportation are being enhanced through the expansion of

integrated ticketing systems, Rapid Pass services and online platforms.

To reduce traffic congestion and improve the urban environment in

Dhaka and its surrounding areas, a strong metro rail network comprising

six MRT lines is being developed. Following the launch of MRT Line-

6, the government is advancing the construction of MRT Line-1 and

MRT Line-5 (Northern Route). At the same time, planning activities for

MRT Line-5 (Southern Route), MRT Line-2 and MRT Line-4 are

progressing. In addition, a monorail-based feeder network will be

developed to ensure fast and seamless connectivity from metro rail

terminal points to various destinations, which will further improve the

efficiency of the urban transport system and passenger services.

Initiatives will also be undertaken to gradually replace ageing buses in

Dhaka with electric buses. Furthermore, the development of women-

friendly and safe transportation systems will help enhance women's

participation in economic activities. Moreover, fully electric metro rail

and bus systems will contribute to reducing air and noise pollution,

thereby playing a positive role in environmental protection. Once

implemented, these initiatives will establish an integrated, safe and

future-oriented urban transport network and further strengthen

connectivity between Dhaka and its surrounding regions.

102

Mr. Speaker,

217.

Integrated development activities under the Bridges Division are

being further strengthened to enhance the country's integrated

communication system. To this end, the construction of major bridges

and elevated expressways is being accelerated, which will reduce travel

time and transportation costs while expanding trade, commerce and

overall economic activities. Furthermore, the introduction and

expansion of electronic toll collection systems, smart traffic

management and the use of environmentally sustainable technologies

will

enhance

modernisation

and

efficiency

in

infrastructure

management. Looking ahead, initiatives have been undertaken to

increase investment in the bridge and expressway sector, construct the

Second Jamuna Bridge, implement the Dhaka-Chattogram Elevated

Expressway and undertake projects under Public-Private Partnership

(PPP) arrangements.

Railway Development

Mr. Speaker,

218.

Our government is undertaking multifaceted initiatives to

enhance the capacity of Bangladesh Railway as a safe, affordable and

environmentally sustainable mode of public transport. These initiatives

include the development of railway infrastructure, the introduction of

modern technologies and the establishment of an integrated

transportation system. Efforts are underway to strengthen the country's

communication network by bringing all districts and major cities under

railway connectivity, expanding rail links with seaports and land ports,

improving regional and cross-border railway communication and

increasing commuter train services. At the same time, work is

progressing on the construction of dual-gauge double lines, gauge

unification, modern signalling systems and the introduction of electric

traction.

103

219.

A chord line will be constructed on the Dhaka-Cumilla section

of the Dhaka-Chattogram railway corridor. Once completed, the

proposed new chord line will reduce the distance between Dhaka and

Chattogram by approximately 80 kilometres, bringing the total route

length down from 320 kilometres to 240 kilometres. As a result, a

transformative improvement will take place in the communication

system of this region, with train travel time between Dhaka and

Chattogram expected to decrease from the current five hours to only

three hours. In addition, freight trains carrying goods from Chattogram

Port, the Bay Terminal and the Matarbari Deep Sea Port will be able to

connect directly to the proposed Dhirashram Inland Container Depot

(ICD) through the existing Chattogram-Feni-Cumilla-Brahmanbaria-

Bhairab-Narsingdi railway line. This will further strengthen the

country's economy and logistics sector.

220.

During the tenure of the present government, integrated

development activities in the railway sector will be further strengthened

with greater priority. To this end, initiatives are being undertaken for the

construction of new railway lines and rail bridges, procurement of

modern locomotives, coaches and wagons, and strengthening the

maintenance of existing railway tracks and bridges. Measures are also

being taken to enhance the capacity of the railway workshops at Saidpur

and Pahartali to facilitate the local assembly of coaches and

locomotives. Furthermore, the quality of passenger and freight transport

services will be improved through the introduction of new train services,

modernisation of signalling systems and expansion of optical fibre-

based communication networks. In order to transform Bangladesh

Railway into a commercially viable institution, greater emphasis is

being placed on freight transport services alongside passenger services,

while private investment is also being encouraged. Plans have also been

undertaken to introduce electric trains, establish high-speed rail

connectivity and procure new rolling stock as part of the sector's

modernisation. Railway infrastructure development will be carried out

through Public-Private Partnership (PPP) arrangements.

104

Water Transport

Mr. Speaker,

221.

Water transport is widely recognised as a cost-effective mode of

transportation. Therefore, the government has adopted multifaceted

plans for the development of the water transport sector. Measures are

being undertaken to ensure a safe, affordable and uninterrupted water

transport system through the development of sea and land port

infrastructure, enhancement of container and cargo handling capacity

and improvement and maintenance of inland waterways. As nearly 95

percent of the country's total import and export activities are conducted

through Chattogram and Mongla ports, the modernisation and efficiency

enhancement of these ports are making a significant contribution to the

national economy. To ease container congestion at Chattogram Port,

integrated measures have been strengthened for faster cargo clearance,

improved yard management and more efficient vessel operations. At the

same time, new equipment has been added, jetty management improved

and cargo-handling operations strengthened to enhance the capacity of

Mongla Port. During the current tenure of the government, integrated

development activities in the water transport sector will be further

strengthened. To achieve this, initiatives have been undertaken to

increase cargo and container handling capacity, improve vessel handling

efficiency, expand dredging activities to maintain navigability of

channels and enhance port yard capacity. Ahead of the monsoon season,

the Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority (BIWTA) is carrying

out emergency dredging operations to keep inland water routes

navigable. In addition, efforts will be accelerated to develop Payra and

Mongla ports, expand land ports, modernise river ports and launch

terminals and strengthen safety in waterways in order to improve the

overall transportation system. Simultaneously, the institutional capacity

of the sector is being further strengthened through the modernisation of

vessel registration systems, skill development and employment

generation for seafarers and the expansion of digital services.

105

Mr. Speaker,

222.

In the coming years, the government will further modernise the

water transport sector and develop it into a sustainable and

internationally competitive system through the implementation of major

projects such as the Matarbari Deep Sea Port and the Chattogram Bay

Terminal, enhancement of port capacity, expansion of dredging

activities and wider adoption of digital and automation systems.

Simultaneously, international trade and the integrated maritime

transport system are being further strengthened through the

implementation of the Matarbari Deep Sea Port, Chattogram Bay

Terminal, Patenga Container Terminal and Laldiya Container Terminal,

as well as the construction of modern port infrastructure.

Civil Aviation

Mr. Speaker,

223.

Integrated development activities are being implemented in the

civil aviation sector with the aim of transforming Bangladesh into a

modern and regional aviation hub. The expansion of terminal facilities

at Jashore and Saidpur airports, the full-scale operation of the Third

Terminal of Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport, the enhancement of

runway capacity at Sylhet and Chattogram airports and the completion

of development works at Cox's Bazar Airport will further improve the

capacity and quality of services at the country's airports. Wi-Fi network

coverage has been expanded across approximately 94,000 square metres

of Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport. These initiatives will further

improve the capacity of the country's airports and enhance the quality

of passenger services.

224.

Biman Bangladesh Airlines has signed a final agreement with

the US aircraft manufacturer Boeing for the procurement of 14 modern

aircraft at an estimated cost of approximately USD 3.7 billion,

106

equivalent to Tk. 45,408 crore. This initiative will expand Biman's fleet,

strengthen international connectivity, enhance passenger and cargo

transportation capacity and further reinforce Bangladesh's competitive

position in the global aviation sector. Simultaneously, a more efficient,

safe and competitive aviation sector will be developed through the

modernisation of passenger services at airports, strengthening of cargo

management systems, improvement of aviation safety standards and

expansion of digital services. The implementation of these initiatives

will accelerate the development of the tourism industry and support the

achievement of the target of increasing the tourism sector's contribution

to GDP to 6-7 percent.

225.

Looking ahead, plans have been undertaken to establish a

national air connectivity grid, develop new international gateways and

transform Dhaka, Chattogram and Sylhet into fully integrated logistics

and passenger hubs. Moreover, Rajshahi, Cox's Bazar, Jashore and

Saidpur will be developed as international gateways, alongside the

introduction of an integrated digital logistics platform. In addition, a

sustainable and inclusive aviation system will be developed through

ensuring hassle-free passenger services at airports, enhancing facilities

for expatriate workers, promoting the use of renewable energy and

developing skilled human resources. As part of the broader tourism

development plan, an investment roadmap is being formulated to attract

tourists and generate substantial employment in this sector. These

initiatives are expected to generate employment, increase private

investment and accelerate economic growth.

Mr. Speaker,

226.

Considering the importance of trade, commerce, supply chains,

and related economic activities in the country, I propose an allocation of

Tk 60 thousand 730 crore for the development of transport and

communication infrastructure in the fiscal year 2026-27. In the revised

107

budget for fiscal year 2025-26, the allocation for this purpose was Tk

48 thousand 292 crore.

Environment and Climate Change

Environmental Conservation and Addressing the Impacts of

Climate Change

Mr. Speaker

227.

One of the key objectives of the Government is to address the

challenges of climate change and to build a green and sustainable

Bangladesh for future generations. Special emphasis has been placed in

the budget for FY 2026-27 on maintaining ecological balance through

environmental conservation and afforestation. The Government will

implement a nationwide programme to plant 25 crore trees over the next

five years. Afforestation activities will be strengthened across marginal

lands, including roads, highways, embankments, riverbanks and canal

banks. Government forest areas will be restored and mangrove

afforestation will be undertaken in coastal char areas. In addition,

afforestation in institutions and homesteads, agroforestry and urban

forestry programmes will be further intensified. Degraded sal forests in

the hilly regions (Chattogram, the Chittagong Hill Tracts and Sylhet) as

well as in the central region will be restored. To encourage public

participation, tree fairs will continue to be organised at national,

divisional, district and upazila levels, alongside the continuation of

National Tree Plantation Awards. Dividends will also be distributed

among the best beneficiaries of social forestry programmes. Through

these initiatives, approximately 3,50,000 green jobs will be created, both

directly and indirectly. Under the 'One Child, One Tree Programme',

the Government has finalised an action plan to facilitate the planting of

108

1 crore trees at the homes and homesteads of students enrolled in

government primary schools.

Mr. Speaker

228.

Digital technologies are being deployed to make afforestation

activities more modern and accountable. GPS and GIS-based data on

afforested areas under the Department of Forests will be collected and

maintained. A 'Tree Monitoring App' is also being developed for the

maintenance and digital surveillance of trees. In addition, in order to

address the impacts of climate change, 50 percent of coastal mangrove

forests will be brought under carbon trading mechanisms. Special

measures have been taken to conserve biodiversity through the updating

of the existing 'Red List' of wildlife for the protection of fauna. Under

this initiative, assessments will be conducted for a total of 2,200 species

of wildlife, including marine species, to safeguard the country's rich

biodiversity.

Mr. Speaker

229.

Under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, initiatives have been

undertaken to implement 11 new carbon trading projects. The present

Government is advancing towards the implementation of a 'Circular

Future Model' in waste management. In the long term, in order to

mitigate the impacts of climate change, initiatives will be taken for

energy generation from waste, production of organic fertiliser from

waste, and the recycling of plastic waste. Air pollution is posing serious

health risks to the population, particularly to children and the elderly.

The Government remains firmly committed to reducing the level of

pollution. Air quality is being regularly monitored through 15

109

Continuous Air Monitoring Stations (CAMS) and 16 Compact

Continuous Air Monitoring Stations (C-CAMS). To control vehicular

emissions, 10 modern Vehicle Inspection Centres will be established

under the Bangladesh Road Transport Authority (BRTA), alongside

plans to introduce electric bus services. Furthermore, initiatives will be

undertaken to introduce continuous online stack emission monitoring

for major polluting industries, including power generation plants. In

addition, regulations will be updated and new guidelines will be

formulated for the environmentally sound management of e-waste.

230.

The Government is committed to ensuring a clean and healthy

environment for future generations. Seventeen single-use items that

pose a serious threat to the environment have been identified as "Single-

use Plastic" and have been banned through official notification. In line

with the Government's Election Manifesto, plastic waste will be

reduced by 30 percent over the next five years through the

implementation of the 3R policy-Reduce, Reuse and Recycle. To

make industrialisation more environmentally friendly, the online

monitoring and clearance issuance process has been strengthened. Out

of 3,260 establishments across the country required to install Effluent

Treatment Plants (ETPs), 2,700 have already installed them. To ensure

transparency, IP cameras have been installed in the ETPs of 820

establishments, enabling centralised monitoring of wastewater

treatment processes.

231.

Priority is being accorded to research, innovation and training

activities to address the risks associated with climate change. In FY

2026-27, initiatives will be undertaken for sustainable forest

management, conservation of endangered forest species, expand

afforestation activities and research activities to ensure the innovative

110

technologies reach to the doorstep of the people. In addition, canals

adjacent to rivers in the southern region of the country will be excavated

to reduce soil salinity in agricultural land. As part of a long-term

strategy, financing will be provided for projects focused on the

development of new crop varieties through organic agriculture, safe

fertilisers and environmentally sustainable production practices. A

balanced development approach has been adopted to improve the

quality of life of people living in coastal areas. In the medium and long

term, plans have been undertaken to ensure the supply of safe water in

coastal regions vulnerable to climate change and to construct sustainable

embankments, riverbank protection works and cyclone shelters to

mitigate the impacts of cyclones and storm surges. Furthermore,

initiatives will be undertaken to promote the development of salinity-

tolerant agriculture in coastal areas.

232.

In implementing the Government's nationwide tree plantation

programme, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,

alongside other ministries, will play a pivotal role. Under the Ministry,

targets have been set for FY 2026-27 to plant 4 crore 28 lac and 97

thousand saplings in 25,960 hectares of block plantations, 37 lac 27

thousand saplings along 3,727 kilometres of strip plantations, 1 crore 77

lac and 76 thousand saplings in 4,000 hectares of mangrove plantations

and 56 lac saplings under homestead afforestation programmes. In

addition, the expansion of 300 hectares of protected areas and the

restoration of 4,500 hectares of encroached forest land have been

accorded priority in order to strengthen biodiversity conservation.

111

Mr. Speaker

233.

Considering the depth and extent of the impacts of climate

change, I propose an allocation of Tk 100 crore for the fiscal year 2026-

27 under the Climate Change Trust Fund to implement necessary

activities.

Management of Water Resources

Mr. Speaker

234.

The Government is formulating and implementing projects on

irrigation, flood management, riverbank protection, land reclamation,

waterlogging mitigation, improvement of drainage systems, salinity

control and other aspects of sustainable water resources management.

Special initiatives have been undertaken to restore and free at least one

river in each division from encroachment in order to maintain ecological

balance. Under a total of seven projects, measures are being

implemented to remove illegal encroachments and restore the natural

flow of the Dhaleshwari, Louhajang, Alaikuri, Mogra, Salta, Sutang,

Bakkhali and Barnai rivers. A Water Quality Index (WQI) has been

developed for the rivers surrounding Dhaka. In addition, a real-time

dashboard for monitoring groundwater levels has been developed using

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and deep learning technologies, opening up

new opportunities for sustainable water resources management.

235.

The Ministry of Water Resources is implementing a nationwide

program titled "Excavation and Re-excavation of Rivers, Canals, and

Water Reservoirs." As part of the initiative to excavate 20,000

kilometers of canals, rivers, and drainage channels over the next five

years by the all relevant ministries, this Ministry is planning to excavate

112

and re-excavate 680 kilometers of canals, irrigation canals, and drainage

canals in FY 2026-27. Furthermore, under the project titled

'Identification and Classification of Canals in Bangladesh and

Development of a Geo-Informatics Database', canals across the country

will be identified and a GIS-based canal network will be developed. To

enhance flood protection, targets have been set for FY 2026-27 to

construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate embankments and flood walls, and to

improve the navigability of rivers and remove submerged shoals over a

total length of 309 kilometres and 484 kilometres, respectively. In

addition, under the 180-Day Programme for Flood Protection,

construction, reconstruction and rehabilitation works covering 292

kilometres of embankments and flood walls are currently underway.

Mr. Speaker

236.

The obstruction of water flows through upstream dams on the

Teesta and the Padma rivers has adversely affected agriculture,

irrigation, fisheries and biodiversity within the river basins of these two

rivers in Bangladesh. In this context, the 'Padma Barrage (Phase-I)'

project, aimed at bringing about a transformation in the agriculture and

fisheries sectors of the south-western region of the country, was

approved at the meeting of the Executive Committee of the National

Economic Council (ECNEC). The project will be implemented between

July 2026 and June 2033. Under the project, a 2.1-kilometre-long main

barrage and a hydropower plant will be constructed on the Padma River

at Pangsha in Rajbari. The project will play a significant role in restoring

freshwater flows during the dry season through the conservation and

regulation of the Padma River water, enhancing agricultural production,

maintaining navigability and preserving ecological balance. Upon

implementation, the project will enable the annual storage of 2,900

million cubic metres of water; prevent salinity intrusion in the Padma

113

basin, including the Sundarbans, through the restoration of navigability

in five distributaries and tributaries; ensure uninterrupted agricultural

production through irrigation of 2.88 million hectares of land; and

increase annual production by 20.39 million tonnes of rice and 2.34

million tonnes of fish. The project is expected to directly and indirectly

benefit people in 120 upazilas across 19 districts in four divisions,

representing approximately 37 percent of the country's population. In

addition, the Government is undertaking initiatives to implement the

'Comprehensive Management and Restoration of the Teesta River

Project', commonly known as the Teesta Master Plan, with a view to

improving the livelihoods and quality of life of the people of the

northern region of the country.

Mr. Speaker

237.

I propose an allocation of Tk 10 thousand and 533 crore for the

Ministry of Water Resources in the fiscal year 2026-27.

Disaster Management

Mr. Speaker

238.

Natural disasters such as floods, cyclones and tidal surges are a

regular phenomenon in our country, causing substantial damage to lives

and property every year. The Government has therefore placed greater

emphasis on sustainable disaster management and disaster risk

reduction. Support under the Employment Generation Programme for

the Poorest (EGPP), employment has been ensured for approximately

20 lakh rural workers, one-third of whom are women. In the current

fiscal year, an allocation of over Tk. 1,510 crore has been made under

114

the Cash for Work (Kabita) programme and more than Tk. 1,454 crore

under the Rural Infrastructure Maintenance (TR) programme to keep

rural infrastructure operational. In addition, more than 5 lakh metric tons

of food grains have been distributed through the Vulnerable Group

Feeding (VGF) and Kabikha programmes. Humanitarian assistance to

over 11 lakh forcibly displaced Myanmar nationals is also being

continued.

239.

At present, construction, renovation and development works of

450 cyclone and disaster shelters are ongoing at a cost of Tk. 150 crore.

In addition, construction of 448 shelters in river erosion-prone and

flood-prone areas is progressing at a fast pace. The Government is

implementing an extensive programme of canal excavation and re-

excavation, alongside afforestation initiatives, across the country with a

view to alleviating waterlogging, expanding irrigation facilities and

maintaining ecological balance. The Ministry of Disaster Management

and Relief has also undertaken activities during the current fiscal year

to mitigate waterlogging through canal excavation and to enhance

environmental sustainability and prevent soil erosion through tree

plantation programmes. Under the Government's 180-Day programme

for the first six months of its tenure, the ministry has set targets for the

excavation of 1,500 kilometres of canals, rivers and drainage channels

as well as the planting of 1,00,000 saplings. Activities are being carried

out accordingly.

240.

For effective central coordination during major disasters, land

has been acquired for the establishment of a National Emergency

Operation Centre (NEOC), and the process for initiating its construction

project is underway. Modern rescue equipment and 11 aerial platform

ladders have been procured at a cost of approximately Tk. 521 crore for

115

earthquake response and other emergency operations. For the Cyclone

Preparedness Programme (CPP), 100 percent wireless communication

coverage has been ensured. A comprehensive online database of 78,100

volunteers has also been developed to strengthen emergency response

capacity. At present, weather forecasts can be accessed instantly from

any part of the country by dialling the toll-free number 1090. Disaster

forecasting activities are being strengthened through the use of satellite

technology. Plans have been undertaken to utilise modern satellite-

based systems for monitoring river erosion. Early warning messages are

also being disseminated down to the grassroots level through SMS

alerts. Under awareness-raising initiatives, regular preparedness drills

on earthquakes, cyclones and fire incidents are being conducted to

enhance community readiness and resilience.

Mr. Speaker

241.

To strengthen activities aimed at tackling natural disasters and

mitigating their impacts, as well as to reduce losses of life and property

from potential major earthquakes, modern rescue equipment will be

procured and institutional capacity will be enhanced. With this

objective, I propose an allocation of Tk 10 thousand and 350 crore for

the Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief in the FY 2026-27. In

the revised budget for the current FY 2025-26, the allocation was Tk 9

thousand and 69 crore.

116

Women and Child Development

Women Empowerment and Child Protection

Mr. Speaker,

242.

The government is working with utmost priority to enhance legal

and scientific capacity for safeguarding women and children. Under the

Multisectoral Program to prevent violence against women, a National

Forensic DNA Profiling Laboratory and seven divisional DNA

screening laboratories have been established. To bring the country's

emerging and aspiring women entrepreneurs under a formal state

framework, a comprehensive database is being compiled, which will

play a pivotal role in ensuring necessary training, credit facilities, and

market linkages for them. Furthermore, specialized adaptation projects

have been undertaken to build the resilience and capacity of women in

coastal regions to mitigate the challenges of climate change. To foster

economic self-reliance among women, the second phase of the "Income-

Generating Activities (IGA) Training Project for Women" is being

successfully implemented at the upazila level.

Mr. Speaker,

243.

As part of this commitment, under the Vulnerable Women

Benefit (VWB) program, 1,040,000 women across 4,586 unions in 493

upazilas are being provided with 30 kg of rice and fortified rice monthly.

To ensure the proper development, protection, and social security of

children from conception up to the age of eight, extensive social

awareness and "Parenting" programs are being implemented.

244.

A "Quick Response Team" has been formed to take immediate

action against the repression of women and children, thereby reinforcing

our integrated support services. To enable working women to participate

in the workforce with confidence, our government has undertaken a

117

major initiative to establish 20 modern daycare centers in the first phase,

followed by an additional 60 centers in the next phase. At the same time,

specific projects have been adopted to ensure social security and proper

rehabilitation of returnee female migrant workers, which will play a

supportive role in reducing the risks associated with labor migration.

Mr. Speaker,

245.

The current government has undertaken special initiatives aimed

at the long-term rehabilitation of street children and children at risk. As

part of this commitment, measures are being implemented to reintegrate

educated and trained children back into their families, alongside

providing financial assistance to the respective households. To ensure

correction and safe accommodation for girl children in conflict with the

law, Child Development Centers are providing housing for an average

of 350 girls annually, while also guaranteeing legal aid, social

protection, and access to justice for affected women and children. At

present, 33 Integrated Child Rehabilitation Centers are operating across

17 districts, offering separate accommodation and livelihood facilities

for 3,300 boys and 3,300 girls, supported by government grants. In

addition, special action plans are being implemented for the welfare of

children with speech, hearing, and visual impairments, as well as those

with autism.

Incentives and Rehabilitation for the Families of Martyred and

Injured Children of the July Mass Uprising

Mr. Speaker,

246.

In recognition of the sacrifice of children who lost their lives

during the July Mass Uprising, and to support their families, financial

assistance has been provided to 84 families on the occasion of World

Children's Day and Children's Rights Week, including a one-time

award of Tk. 50,000 in prize bonds along with a crest of honour.

118

Concurrently, comprehensive initiatives are underway to ensure the

physical and psychological recovery of the children injured during the

uprising, facilitating their seamless reintegration into mainstream

society.

Mr. Speaker,

247.

I propose an allocation of Tk 5 thousand 196 crore for the

Ministry of Women and Children Affairs in the fiscal year 2026-27 for

the development of women and children.

Relious freedon and harmony

Mr. Speaker

248.

We believe in unity and equality, rather religious division. To

fulfill the Government's electoral commitments, various programs and

initiatives are being implemented to ensure religious freedom and

harmony, promote moral values and ethics, improve the social status and

living standards of religious leaders, strengthen the Religious Welfare

Trust, ensure the smooth performing of Hajj, expand Islamic research

activities and mass education programs, and promote morality and

religious values in society.

249.

Immediately after assuming office, the Government took

necessary measures to enhance the social status and living standards of

religious leaders. In the case of mosques, a total monthly allowance of

Tk. 10,000 is being provided to Imams, Muezzins, and Khatibs, while a

total monthly allowance of Tk. 8,000 is being provided to priests and

caretakers of other religious institutions. To date, monthly honorarium

and festival allowances have been provided to 9,520 religious leaders

serving in 6,438 religious institutions. Our government has a plan to

gradually extend this benefit to all places of worship across the country.

119

For this purpose, I propose an allocation of Tk. 1 thousand 81 crore in

the upcoming budget.

250.

As part of the ongoing efforts to evict illegal occupants and

recover Waqf properties, 28.20 acres of land belonging to 11 Waqf

estates have been so far recovered. Initiatives have been taken to reduce

the cost of the performing Hajj for 2026. Necessary measures are being

undertaken to make Hajj management more affordable, accessible, and

efficient in the future. In addition, initiatives have been taken to increase

the training targets for Imams and Muezzins in the coming years.

120

Chapter VII: Revenue Management and Revenue

Collection

Mr. Speaker

251.

At this difficult time with problems around the world, rising

prices, energy concerns, and food shortages, we are presenting the

National Budget for the year 2026-27. Normally, our tax revenue target

is based on the size of the budget and GDP growth. About 86 percent of

this tax is collected by the National Board of Revenue (NBR). Even

though there are many problems around the world, we have continued

to maintain the growth in tax collection despite lower tax GDP ratio.

While collecting tax revenue is the main objective of the NBR, it also

plays vital role in industrialization, increase employment, help

businesses grow, protect local businesses, and attract foreign investment

into the country.

Mr. Speaker,

252.

The main goal of our government is to:

•

Make Bangladesh a trillion dollars economy by 2034

•

Increase the tax-to-GDP ratio to 10 percent in the medium term

•

Further increase the tax-to-GDP ratio to 15 percent by 2035

To achieve this goal, we need a fair tax system that uses modern

technology. This revenue system should be business friendly, clear and

predictable which will speed up the cycle of Investment-Production-

Employment-Consumption-Tax.

Our government believes in building a modern and clear tax system

through computerization and bringing back trust in the tax system. This

121

budget gives special importance to removing unnecessary rules to make

it easier to do business and stop burdening taxpayers.

Mr. Speaker,

253.

In formulating budget, we have consulted various stakeholders

before making this budget. We have received 4,494 proposals from 613

organizations. These suggestions came from Different government

departments, The Tariff Commission, BIDA, BEZA, BEPZA, FBCCI

and business groups, Research institutions, Representatives from

industry and services. We carefully thought about and considered all

these valuable suggestions and proposals in making this budget.

We know that our tax system is facing a number of challenges such as;

lower Tax GDP ratio, wider exemption culture, evasion of tax,

inadequate digitalization. This budget has a plan to widening the tax

base, preventing tax evasion, reducing tax exemption gradually.

We are also taking steps to simplifying tax compliance through end-to -

end digitalization and implementing policy reforms for ease of doing

business.

Income Tax Proposals

Direct Tax: Income Tax

Mr. Speaker,

254.

Now, I want to place before this august Parliament the income

tax proposals for FY 2026-27.

The principal objectives of this year's budget are:

122

•

Accelerating investment

•

Reviving the economy and creating jobs

•

Establishing a progressive, modern, transparent, and automated

tax system based on fairness and taxpayers' ability to pay

Proposed Progressive Tax Structure for Individual Taxpayers for

the Next Five Years

To enable taxpayers to know what taxes they will pay in future years, I

propose a five-year income tax plan for individual taxpayers.

Tax-Free Income Threshold

As prices of essentials are going up and cost of living are getting higher,

we are proposing to increase the amount of income that is free from

income tax.

Assessment Year

Tax-Free Income Limit

2026-27 and 2027-28

BDT 375,000

2028-29 and 2029-30

BDT 400,000

2030-31

BDT 450,000

The existing tax-free income threshold (Annexture A, Table 1) of BDT

350,000 is proposed to be increased to BDT 375,000 and gradually

increased in subsequent years.

123

Special Categories of Taxpayers

Category

2026-27 &

2027-28

2028-29 &

2029-30

2030-31

Women taxpayers and senior

citizens aged 65+

BDT

425,000

450,000

500,000

Third-gender taxpayers and

physically

challenged

persons

BDT

500,000

525,000

575,000

Gazetted

war-wounded

freedom

fighters

and

gazetted July fighters

BDT

525,000

550,000

6,00,000

Parents/legal guardians of

persons with disabilities

Additional BDT 50,000 for each

disabled child/dependent

Individual Income Tax Rates (Annexture A, Table 2)

(A) Assessment Years 2026-27 and 2027-28

Total Income

Rate

First BDT 375,000

Nil

Next BDT 300,000

10%

Next BDT 400,000

15%

Next BDT 500,000

20%

Next BDT 2,000,000

25%

Remaining income above BDT 3,575,000

30%

124

(B) Assessment Years 2028-29 and 2029-30

Total Income

Rate

First BDT 400,000

Nil

Next BDT 300,000

10%

Next BDT 400,000

15%

Next BDT 500,000

20%

Next BDT 2,000,000

25%

Next BDT 26,400,000

30%

Remaining income above BDT 30,000,000

35%

(C) Assessment Year 2030-31

Total Income

Rate

First BDT 450,000

Nil

Next BDT 300,000

10%

Next BDT 400,000

15%

Next BDT 500,000

20%

Next BDT 2,000,000

25%

Next BDT 26,350,000

30%

Remaining income above BDT 30,000,000

35%

125

Corporate Tax

Mr. Speaker,

255.

You know, without investment there can be no jobs. Without

investment, production will not be increased and the economy will not

be stronger.

Therefore, this budget proposes measures to:

•

Simplify corporate tax rules easier to follow

•

Enable online tax return filing and tax payment

•

Remove unnecessary regulatory burdens

•

Increase the limit of allowable business expenses

•

remove the existing provision of disallowing the whole expenses

solely due to failure to deduct withholding tax

•

Reduce taxable income and tax burdens

•

ensure use of automated methods in selection of audit cases and

verification of withholding tax in a fair and transparent way.

Corporate Tax Rates

256.

To maintain policy continuity and provide certainty to investors,

existing corporate tax rates (Annexture A, Table 3) are proposed to

remain unchanged for the next assessment year.

In the future, we will gradually reduce rates through expansion of the

tax base while ensuring adequate revenue collection.

126

Income Tax Relief Measures

Relief on Essential Goods and Agricultural Products

Mr. Speaker,

257.

Our pro-people elected government has taken a major step to

help ordinary people by reducing withholding tax on 60 essential

commodities.

These items include: paddy, rice, wheat, potatoes, livestock, poultry,

fish, onion, garlic, ginger, salt, sugar, edible oil and seeds. The

withholding tax rates of 5%, 2%, and 1% will be reduced to only 0.5%.

258.

Additional Tax Relief Measures:

•

As part of tax relief measures in the health sector, the existing

5% Advance Income Tax (AIT) on the import of kidney dialysis

filters will be fully exempted.

•

The Advance Income Tax (AIT) rate on 15 imported products

for persons with disabilities will be reduced from 2% to 1%.

•

Due to the high rate of withholding tax, the supply of gold and

gold jewellery has largely remained outside the formal economy,

resulting in a loss of government revenue. To bring this business

into the formal sector and increase government revenue

collection, the withholding tax rate on the supply of gold and

gold jewellery will be reduced from 5% to only 0.5%.

•

To promote environmentally friendly transportation, the

withholding tax rate on the import of electric buses, electric

trucks, and electric charging stations will be reduced from 5% to

zero percent.

127

•

The existing 5% Advance Income Tax on the import of computer

printers, portable automatic data processing machines, flash

memory devices, and computer monitors will be reduced to 2%.

•

The Advance Income Tax rate on the import of 22 raw materials

used in local mobile phone manufacturing will be reduced from

5% and 2% to 1%.

•

The withholding tax rate on payments for electricity purchased

from power generation companies will be reduced from 4% to

3%.

•

The withholding tax rate on the supply of fuel oil by refineries

will be reduced from 1.5% to 1%.

•

The withholding tax rate on cash incentives received against

export earnings will be reduced from 10% to 5%.

•

The rate on recycled products and recycling raw materials will

be reduced from 3% to 1%.

•

The existing 20% withholding tax on revenue sharing, license

fees, or charges received by the Bangladesh Telecommunication

Regulatory Commission (BTRC) will be completely removed.

•

The withholding tax rate in the mobile network services sector

will be reduced from 12% to 10%.

•

The withholding tax rate on the supply of packaging materials

will be reduced from 5% to 3%.

•

The tax rate in the transportation, carrying, and vehicle rental

services sector will be reduced from 5% to 2%.

•

The general rate of advance tax at import stage on industrial raw

materials will be reduced from 5% to 4%.

•

To encourage foreign investment, the withholding tax rate on

payments to non-resident taxpayers for machinery rental will be

reduced from 15% to 7.5%.

128

•

To reduce reinsurance costs in the insurance sector, the

withholding tax rate on insurance premiums paid to non-resident

taxpayers will be reduced from 10% to 5%.

•

To lower the cost of funds in industrial investment, the

withholding tax rate on foreign loan interest proposed to be

reduced from 20% to 10%.

These measures will improve business cash flow, reduce inflationary

pressure at the consumer level, lower production costs, and

consequently encourage more investment in industry and business.

Withholding Tax to be Treated as Advance Tax

259.

Until now, withholding tax deducted at source was treated as a

mandatory minimum tax, even when a taxpayer had little or no taxable

income. This often-created liquidity constraints for businesses. The

Government proposes to abolish this provision and adopt the

internationally accepted practice of treating withholding tax as an

advance tax. Any excess withholding tax paid will be refunded. This

measure will help create a more business-friendly environment in the

country.

Mr. Speaker,

260.

As a responsible government, our tax policy should not be

focused solely on revenue collection; it should also serve as a tool to

help ensure food security, energy security, and environmental

protection.

Food Security

To increase the supply of edible oil, I propose 10 years tax benefit to the

local producer of edible oil by using home grown oil seed, by providing

129

100% tax exemption for first 05 years, 50% tax exemption for next 03

years, and 25% tax exemption for last two years. This measure will

encourage investment in agricultural and increase domestic edible oil

production in the country.

Renewable Energy

•

To encourage solar power generation that is environmentally

friendly, affordable, and sustainable, I propose a zero percent tax

rate on the solar power sector until 2035. At the same time, I

propose granting consumers a 5 percent tax rebate on payments

made against their solar electricity bills.

•

For the registration and renewal of all types of electric vehicles

(EVs) with the Bangladesh Road Transport Authority (BRTA), I

propose reducing the existing Advance Income Tax of Tk. 200,000

and replacing it with the following lower rates based on vehicle

capacity:

Electric Vehicle

Capacity

Present Rate

Proposed Rate

Up to 200 KW

200,000

Tk. 25,000

Above 200 KW up to

300 KW

200,000

Tk. 50,000

Above 300 KW up to

400 KW

200,000

Tk. 75,000

Above 400 KW

200,000

Tk. 100,000

A substantial increase in the use of solar power and electric vehicles will

reduce the country's dependence on imported fuel oil. We want

Bangladesh's industrialization to be productive, sustainable, and

environmentally friendly.

130

Mr. Speaker,

261.

At the heart of this budget lies employment generation. We want

to design our tax policy in a manner that enables new businesses, new

ideas, and a new generation of entrepreneurs can move forward and

thrive.

Support for Youth, Women, Persons with Disabilities, and

Innovative Entrepreneurs

•

At present, tax exemption is available only for IT freelancing

income. I propose extending this tax exemption to all categories of

freelancing income. This will encourage freelancers to send their

earnings through formal banking channels and bring such income

into the country through legitimate means.

•

I also propose making all income from content creation completely

free from income tax.

•

To promote youth entrepreneurship, startups, innovative ventures,

and technology-based businesses, I propose zero percent turnover

tax rate for such enterprises.

•

I propose exempting from income tax the income from business

turnover up to Tk. 5 million by SME entrepreneurs, and 7 million

by women entrepreneurs and entrepreneurs with disabilities.

•

I propose granting an accelerated depreciation allowance for

investments in industrial, tourism, or sports-related establishments

and machinery located outside the Dhaka and Chattogram City

Corporation areas, at the rate of 60 percent in the first year and 40

percent in the second year.

131

Charitable Donations

Mr. Speaker,

262.

In addition to the role of the State, it is equally important to

strengthen the charitable institutions of society.

To this end, and as part of the tax rebate framework designed to

encourage taxpayers to contribute to charitable and public welfare

activities, I propose the approval of a list of 11 public welfare

organizations engaged in healthcare, disability services, cancer care,

autism support, diabetes treatment, thalassemia services, and social

welfare activities. Donations made to these approved organizations will

qualify for tax rebate benefits.

Mr. Speaker,

263.

We are introducing a number of fundamental reforms to make

doing business easier and more efficient. Our objective is not only to

increase tax rates, rather to broaden the tax base. To achieve this goal

we are undertaking several practical and evidence-based measures. .

•

To broaden the tax base, I propose collecting of Advance Income

Tax (AIT) at the rate of 0.20 percent on the supply of goods to

retailers.

The amount of such advance tax collected from retailers will be

very small. It will be only Tk. 2 for every Tk. 1,000 worth of goods

supplied. Furthermore, this advance tax will be adjustable against

the taxpayer's tax liability. We expect this initiative will contribute

significantly to the expansion of the tax base.

•

I propose requiring that, except for holders of student accounts, No-

Frills Accounts, and individuals exempted by Gazette notification

of the Board from obtaining a Taxpayer Identification Number

132

(TIN), all persons must submit a TIN certificate when opening a

bank account.

•

Through Central Data Integration, the National Board of Revenue's

(NBR) database will be connected with the National Identity Card

database, banks, utility service providers, sub-registry offices, and

other relevant institutions to facilitate the exchange and sharing of

information.

•

The introduction of a Withholders Identification Number (WIN)

will make the withholding tax system more efficient and effective.

•

I propose making a TIN mandatory for the registration of

motorcycles with engine capacities of 150 cc and above. However,

motorcycle owners will not be required to pay any tax for

registration or renewal of registration.

Best Taxpayer Award 2026

Mr. Speaker,

264.

In order to accord taxpayers, the recognition and respect they

deserve, elevate their social status, and encourage voluntary tax

compliance among all citizens, an initiative has been undertaken to

formulate "Best Taxpayer Award Policy, 2026." Under this policy, a

total of 67 taxpayers, including up to 22 sector-specific award recipients,

will be honored with the Best Taxpayer Award.

Recipients of the Best Taxpayer Award will be entitled to the following

privileges:

•

Invitation to national ceremonies and state events;

•

Participation in cultural programmes at both district and national

levels;

133

•

Priority access to accommodation at Circuit Houses;

•

Access to cabin facilities in government hospitals;

•

Priority in obtaining transport tickets;

•

Access to VIP lounges at airports; and

•

Priority access to tickets for sporting events and exhibitions.

Import-Export Duties and Taxes

Mr. Speaker,

265.

With a view to ensuring sustainable economic growth, create an

investment-friendly

environment,

generate

new

employment

opportunities, and improve the living standards of our people, I now

present before this august National Parliament the proposals relating to

import-export duties and taxes for the fiscal year 2026-27.

Restructuring Import Tariff

Mr. Speaker,

266.

In order to promote the development of domestic industries,

safeguard revenue, and maintain alignment with international trade

policies, I would like to propose the following restructuring and

rationalization of import duty, supplementary duty, and regulatory duty

for the fiscal year 2026-27:

1) Import Duty

I propose keeping unchanged the existing eight-tier import duty

structure (0%, 1%, 3%, 5%, 6%, 10%, 15%, and 25%) for the upcoming

fiscal year 2026-27.

134

To fulfil commitments made to the World Trade Organization (WTO)

and to rationalize tariffs on items, I propose reducing import duty on 69

products (Annex-B, Table-1(a)).

2) Supplementary Duty

Mr. Speaker,

To ensure revenue generation, protect domestic industries, and maintain

investment flows, I propose continuing the existing thirteen-tier

supplementary duty structure (10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 45%, 60%, 100%,

150%, 200%, 250%, 300%, 350%, and 500%) in the next fiscal year.

Additionally, as part of tariff rationalization at the import stage, I

propose reducing or withdrawing supplementary duty on 9 products

(Annex-B, Table-1(b)).

3) Regulatory Duty

Mr. Speaker,

I propose revising the existing nine-tier regulatory duty structure (0%,

3%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, and 35%) into a six-tier structure

(0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, and 25%).

Under this proposal:

•

Products currently subject to 3% regulatory duty will be

adjusted to 5%.

•

Products currently subject to 30% and 35% regulatory duty will

be reduced to 25%.

However, products enjoying special concessionary benefits will remain

outside the scope of this restructuring.

135

Furthermore, to rationalize tariffs, I propose fully withdrawing the

existing regulatory duty on 113 products (Annex-B, Table-1(c)).

4) Value Added Tax (VAT)

Mr. Speaker,

To rationalize the existing tariff structure, I propose imposing 15% VAT

at the import stage on 20 products that currently do not bear VAT

(Annex-B, Table-1(d)).

Rationalization of Minimum Import Values

Mr. Speaker,

267.

I propose further rationalizing of minimum import values for

certain products. The proposals are as follows (Annex-B, Table-2):

•

Withdrawal of minimum import value for some products under

14 HS headings

•

Reduction of minimum import value for some products under 3

HS headings

•

Rationalization of minimum import value for some products

under 27 HS headings

•

Imposition of new minimum import value for some products

under 4 HS headings

•

Change in classification code for products under 1 HS heading

•

Change in product description under 1 HS heading

136

Sector-Wise Proposals

(A) Investment, Employment and Export Sector

1) Establishment of Free Trade Zones to Promote Trade and

Investment

•

To expand trade and investment, I propose introducing a new

chapter along with several provisions in the Customs Act to

facilitate the establishment of Free Trade Zones, similar to those

in many countries around the world.

•

Within these Free Trade Zones, goods can be imported duty-free

for storage, grading, packing, manufacturing, and processing for

export.

•

Additionally, goods may also be supplied to the domestic market

from within the Free Trade Zone upon payment of applicable

duties and taxes.

•

This will significantly reduce supply-chain lead time for

domestic enterprises, including SMEs and MSMEs, while also

easing pressure on their working capital.

2) Amendment of Policies to Attract Investment in Off-Dock and

ICD Operations

•

To facilitate trade and attract investment, I propose abolishing

the existing provision that limits foreign shareholding to a

maximum of 49 percent in private off-dock and ICD

operations, thereby opening this sector equally to both

domestic and foreign investors.

137

3) Formulation of Regulations for Establishing Air Cargo Operator

Stations

•

To simplify trade and reduce supply-chain lead time, I propose

issuing a new regulation for establishing Air Cargo Operator

Stations, enabling globally renowned logistics companies and

domestic private operators to invest in air-cargo clearance

activities.

•

Once implemented, the international airports in Dhaka,

Chattogram, and Sylhet will gradually be transformed into

full-fledged logistics hubs, accelerating the growth of the

e-commerce sector.

4) Formulation of Regulations for Private Port and Terminal

Operators

•

To improve the quality of port services to international standards

and to attract greenfield investment, I propose issuing a

regulation concerning private port and terminal operators.

5) Providing Duty-Tax Concession to Promote Domestic Solar

Power Manufacturing Industry

•

To expand the renewable and sustainable energy sector,

particularly solar power, the most important and safest source of

clean energy, I propose issuing a new notification reducing

import duty, regulatory duty, supplementary duty, and advance

tax on essential solar-power components to zero percent

(Annex-B, Table-3(a)).

•

For long-term and sustainable development of this sector, I

propose keeping this notification effective up to 30 June 2031.

138

•

However, to encourage domestic production of related items

such as mounting structures, lithium cells, battery packs, and

battery energy storage systems, I propose withdrawing these

concessions on these items after 30 June 2028, with the

expectation that domestic production will meet demand by then.

6) Duty-Tax Exemptions to Promote Electric Vehicle (EV)

Manufacturing

•

To promote environmentally friendly electric vehicles as an

alternative to fossil-fuel-based transport, and to encourage local

manufacturing of EV components, I propose issuing a new

notification granting duty concessions.

•

For enterprises achieving high value addition through body

building, welding, painting, and assembling of four-wheelers

and three-wheelers, I propose exempting all duties and taxes

except a 3 percent import duty on raw materials and components.

•

For enterprises achieving comparatively lower value addition

through assembly and painting, I propose exempting all duties

and taxes except a 15 percent import duty.

•

Additionally, for local manufacturers of electric buses and

trucks, I propose full exemption from all duties and taxes except

5 percent VAT on the import of raw materials and components.

•

All these concessions will remain in force until 30 June 2031.

7) Concession for E-Bike Manufacturing

•

To further expand existing duty exemptions for the domestic

e-bike manufacturing industry, I propose extending these

concessions to local vendor industries engaged in producing

139

parts and components, in addition to e-bike manufacturers and

assemblers.

8)

Long-Term

Concessions

for

Consumer

Electronics

Manufacturing Industry

•

To ensure that mostly import dependent electronic products such

as mobile phones, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners,

washing machines, ATMs, and CCTV cameras, can be produced

locally at affordable prices, and to encourage export as well, I

propose extending existing duty exemptions on raw materials for

manufacturing these products until 30 June 2030.

9) Concessions for Computer and Digital Device Manufacturing

•

To accelerate the growth of the domestic computer and digital

device sector, I propose extending duty exemptions on raw

materials and components for manufacturing computers,

computer parts, and digital devices until 30 June 2030.

10) Long-Term Concessions for Developing the Semiconductor

Industry

•

Every year, our universities produce many qualified engineers,

and many more are contributing globally as part of the

Bangladeshi diaspora.

•

To harness their talent, create high-skilled employment, and

promote export-oriented growth, I propose issuing a new

notification exempting all regulatory duty, supplementary duty,

VAT, and advance tax except 1 percent import duty on raw

140

materials used in semiconductor or chip design, testing, and

packaging up to 30 June 2031 (Annex-B, Table-3(b)).

11) Concessions on Raw Materials for Smart Card and Bank Card

Manufacturing

•

To support the growing demand for digital services such as

family cards, farmer cards, and e-health cards, I propose

exempting the additional 5 percent import duty on ten essential

raw materials required for manufacturing smart cards and

banking debit/credit cards (Annex-B, Table-3(c)).

12) Continuation of Concessions for Shipbuilding and Dredger

Manufacturing

•

To sustain the growth of the shipbuilding and dredger industry

and maintain global competitiveness, I propose extending

existing duty concessions on raw materials and components until

30 June 2030.

13) Concessions for Bio-Hygiene Machinery Manufacturing

•

To support the emerging domestic bio-hygiene machinery

industry, I propose exempting 10 percent import duty and all

regulatory duty, VAT, and supplementary duty on raw materials

and including these items in the relevant concessionary

notification (Annex-B, Table-3(d)).

14) Concessions for Environment-Friendly Battery Manufacturing

141

•

To encourage domestic production of lithium-ion batteries,

sodium-ion batteries, and lithium-ion battery packs, I propose

issuing a new notification granting duty exemptions on raw

materials required for manufacturing these products untill 30

June 2030

(B) Consumer Goods

1) Reduction of Import Duty on Raw Materials for Infant Food

Preparation Industry

•

To make infant and young-children's food more affordable, I

propose reducing the import duty on raw materials used for

producing imported infant food preparations from 15 percent to

10 percent. This will help lower market prices and make such

essential food items more accessible to the public.

2) Withdrawal of Regulatory Duty on All Spices

•

Spices being an essential part of people's everyday diet, I

propose fully withdrawing the existing 5 percent regulatory duty

on all types of spices (Annex-B, Table-4).

3) Withdrawal of Regulatory Duty on Dates

•

I propose fully withdrawing the existing 5 percent regulatory

duty on the import of dates.

142

(C) Agriculture Sector

1) VAT Exemption on 36 Raw Materials Used in Pesticide and

Insecticide Production

•

To encourage domestic production of pesticides and

insecticides, I propose reducing VAT to zero percent on 36 raw

materials listed in the relevant concessionary notification

(Annex-B, Table-5(a)).

2) Concessions on Raw Materials for Fertilizer Production

•

To achieve self-sufficiency in the production of zinc sulfate

fertilizer and to support domestic industry, I propose fully

exempting import duty on zinc ash, the primary raw material for

zinc sulfate.

3) Expanded Concessions for Veterinary Medicine Imports

•

I propose granting zero-duty concessions on generic categories

of veterinary medicines, instead of limiting the benefit to

specific branded products.

4) Reduction of Duty on Raw Materials for Fruit-Bag Production

•

To support safe and export-quality fruit production by marginal

women entrepreneurs and cottage and small industries as well, I

propose reducing import duty on biodegradable composite

paper, the main raw material for fruit bags, from 10 percent to 5

percent.

143

5) Increased Duty on Cashew Nuts to Encourage Domestic

Cultivation

•

To encourage meeting domestic demand through local

production, I propose increasing import duty on raw cashew nuts

(in shell) from 1 percent to 25 percent, and on processed cashew

nuts (shelled) from 5 percent to 25 percent.

•

However, since domestic production cannot yet fully meet the

needs of local processing industries, I propose setting import

duty at 15 percent on raw cashew nuts imported as industrial raw

material.

6) Supplementary Duty on Imported Pangas Fish Fillet

•

To protect the domestic fish processing industry, I propose

imposing a 20 percent supplementary duty on imported pangas

fish fillets.

7) Concessions on Raw Materials for Poultry, Dairy, and Fish Feed

•

To ensure sustained growth and protection of the poultry, dairy,

and fish feed industries, I propose adding three new raw

materials to the zero-duty list in the relevant concessionary

notification.

8) Concessions on Poultry Machinery and Spare Parts

•

To support domestic manufacturers of poultry and dairy

machinery, I propose adding five essential items, belt-type

manure removal machine, hatcher machine, setter machine,

144

humidity sensor, and temperature sensor, to the concessionary

notification and reducing their import duty to zero percent

(Annex-B, Table-5(b)).

(D) Health Sector

1) Concessions on Raw Materials for Medical Equipment

Manufacturing

•

To support the growth of the domestic medical equipment and

components manufacturing industry, I propose setting import

duty at 15 percent on essential raw materials such as

medical-grade adhesive and medical-grade PVC sheets used for

blood bags.

•

I also propose setting import duty at 5 percent on medical-grade

natural rubber latex and medical-grade blood collection needles.

•

I further propose extending the validity of the relevant

concessionary notification untill 30 June 2030.

2) Duty Exemption on Dialysis Filters for Kidney Patients

•

Dialysis filters are highly sensitive and essential medical items

required to sustain the lives of thousands of kidney patients

across the country.

•

At present, high tax burdens on these items significantly increase

treatment costs for critically ill patients. Therefore, I propose

fully withdrawing the existing 15 percent VAT and 5 percent

advance income tax on the import of dialysis filters.

145

•

As a result of these exemptions, the cost of each dialysis session

for kidney patients is expected to decrease by approximately

BDT 800.

3) Reduction of Import Duty on Mortuary

•

To ensure proper preservation of deceased bodies, I propose

reducing the existing 25 percent import duty on mortuary to 1

percent.

(E) Pharmaceutical Sector

1) Concessions on Nine New Raw Materials for Cancer Medicine

Production

•

To strengthen the domestic pharmaceutical industry and enable

local production of high-quality, affordable cancer medicines, I

propose adding nine new raw materials to the existing

concessionary notification and reducing import duty and VAT

on these items to zero percent (Annex-B, Table-6(a)).

2) Full Duty Exemption on 51 New Raw Materials for API

Production

•

To expand the pharmaceutical sector and promote local

production of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API), I

propose fully exempting import duty on 51 new raw materials

required for API manufacturing (Annex-B, Table-6(b)).

146

3) Concessions on 17 New Raw Materials for Pharmaceutical

Exports

•

To sustain the strong export growth of Bangladeshi

pharmaceuticals in the global market, I propose adding 17

additional essential raw materials to the existing concessionary

notification and reducing import duty on these items to zero

percent (Annex-B, Table-6(c)).

4) Concessions on Biological Safety Cabinets

•

To ensure safe and compliant pharmaceutical production

environments, I propose reducing the existing 25 percent import

duty on Biological Safety Cabinets to 1 percent and including

them in the concessionary notification for capital machinery.

5) Concessions on Sandwich Panel Rooms for Pharmaceutical

Manufacturing

•

To support pharmaceutical manufacturers in maintaining

controlled production environments, I propose reducing import

duty on Sandwich Panel Rooms from the existing 5 percent to 1

percent and including them in the relevant concessionary

notification.

(F) Public Health Sector

1) Concessions on Sewage Treatment Plants

•

To modernize waste management systems in Dhaka, divisional

cities, and industrial zones, and to advance the "Circular Future

147

Model," I propose reducing import duty on sewage treatment

plants from 5 percent to 1 percent.

2) Supplementary Duty on Raw Materials Used in Tobacco

Products

•

Considering the severe public health risks associated with

tobacco consumption, I propose imposing a 300 percent

supplementary duty on acetate tow and filter rods two essential

raw materials used in cigarette filter production where no

supplementary duty currently exists.

•

Furthermore, to discourage the import of highly harmful nicotine

granules and nicotine pouches, I propose creating new tariff

codes and imposing a 350 percent supplementary duty on these

items.

(G) Concessions on Assistive Devices for Persons with Disabilities

Mr. Speaker,

•

To enhance mobility, independence, and quality of life for

persons with disabilities, I propose fully exempting all import

duty, regulatory duty, supplementary duty, and advance tax on

21 types of Special Assistive Devices. This measure will reduce

financial burdens on families and society, while ensuring greater

accessibility for those with special needs (Annex-B, Table-7).

148

(H) Transport Sector

1) Duty Concessions to Promote Electric Vehicles (EVs)

•

To reduce environmental pollution and strengthen energy

security, the National Board of Revenue has already issued a

notification granting full duty-tax exemption on electric buses

used for transporting students at schools, colleges, and

universities, and full exemption (except VAT) on other electric

buses and trucks. I propose extending this facility until 30 June

2030.

•

At present, high tax burdens make electric vehicles unaffordable

for most citizens. To address this, I propose reducing the total

tax incidence on imported EVs as follows:

o For EVs priced up to USD 25,000: from 93 percent to 64

percent

o For EVs priced from more than USD 25000 up to USD

50,000: from 93 percent to 80 percent (Annex-B, Table-8(a))

2) Reduced Duties on Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEVs)

•

To promote energy efficiency and environmental protection, I

propose revising the duty-tax structure for plug-in hybrid electric

vehicles with engine capacity up to 2000 cc.

•

I propose reducing supplementary duty depending on vehicle

type, and fully withdrawing regulatory duty on brand-new

plug-in hybrid vehicles up to 1800 cc.

•

As a result:

149

o Total tax incidence on brand-new PHEVs up to 1800 cc will

decrease from 93.16 percent to 73.437 percent

o Total tax incidence on brand-new PHEVs up to 2000 cc will

decrease from 132.36 percent to 96.10 percent (Annex-B,

Table-8(b))

3) Full Duty Exemption on EV Chargers and Charging Stations

•

A nationwide charging network is essential for the smooth

operation of electric vehicles. To support this, I propose

reducing the total tax incidence on EV chargers and charging

stations from 39.75 percent to zero percent.

4) Increased Duties to Discourage Fossil-Fuel Vehicles

•

To discourage the use of environmentally harmful diesel, octane,

and petrol-powered vehicles, and to promote the adoption of

electric vehicles, I propose increasing the total tax incidence on

imported internal combustion engine vehicles of 1200-1600 cc

from 132.36 percent to 155.88 percent (Annex-B, Table-8(c)).

•

The existing tax structure for other vehicle categories will

remain unchanged.

5) Reduced Duty on Tugboats

•

To modernize port operations and accelerate foreign trade, I

propose reducing import duty on tugboats from 10 percent to 5

percent

150

(J) Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Sector

1) Significant Reduction of Duties on Computer Equipment to

Promote ICT Development

•

To build a technologically advanced Bangladesh and expand

employment opportunities in the IT sector, I propose fully

withdrawing import duty, regulatory duty, supplementary duty,

and VAT on laptops, desktop computers, computer printers, and

computer monitors.

•

For SSDs (Solid State Drives), I propose retaining existing 5

percent import duty while withdrawing all regulatory duty,

supplementary duty, and VAT.

2) Point of Sales (POS) Machines

•

To support the government's initiative to promote cashless

transactions, I propose reducing import duty on Point of Sales

(POS) machines from 10 percent to 5 percent and withdrawing

the existing 7.5 percent advance tax.

(K) Creative Economy Sector

•

To harness the creativity and intellectual potential of our

promising young generation and build a globally competitive

"Creative Economy," I propose reducing duties on several items

essential for high-quality content creation and filmmaking,

ensuring that such tools remain within the reach of young

creators.

151

•

To enhance the quality of music used in digital media and

support creative music production, I propose fully withdrawing

the existing 5 percent regulatory duty on musical instruments

such as guitars, pianos, violins and their essential parts.

•

Additionally, to elevate the technical standards of film and

creative media production to international levels, I propose

reducing import duty on high-tech cinematographic cameras and

spare parts for cinematographic cameras and projectors from 15

percent to 5 percent.

(N) Industrial Sector

To promote and protect domestic industries, I propose the following

measures:

•

I propose fully withdrawing the existing 45 percent

supplementary duty on float glass, a key raw material for

manufacturing

washing

machines,

electric

ovens,

and

microwave ovens.

•

I

propose

extending

the

existing

concessionary

and

duty-exemption facilities on raw materials and components used

in the production of LPG cylinders, auto tanks, and valves &

bungs until 30 June 2027.

•

To prevent misuse of bonded warehouse facilities, I propose

fully withdrawing the existing 10 percent supplementary duty on

the import of synthetic woven fabrics and reducing it to zero

percent.

152

•

To protect the domestic gypsum board and sheet manufacturing

industry, I propose imposing a 20 percent regulatory duty on the

import of gypsum boards and sheets.

•

To protect the domestic gypsum plaster industry, I propose

increasing the existing import duty on gypsum plasters from 5

percent to 10 percent.

•

To provide adequate protection to domestic PVC resin and PET

resin manufacturers, I propose increasing the existing import

duty on these items from 5 percent to 10 percent.

•

To protect domestic oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide gas

manufacturering industries established through local investment

in the post-COVID period, I propose increasing the regulatory

duty on oxygen and nitrogen gas imports from 15 percent to 20

percent, and on carbon dioxide gas imports from 5 percent to 20

percent.

•

To protect domestic manufacturers of bicycle parts, I propose

increasing the import duty on free-wheel bicycle parts from 15

percent to 25 percent, along with imposing a new 5 percent

regulatory duty.

•

To protect the domestic transformer manufacturing industry (up

to 1 kVA capacity), I propose increasing the import duty on

transformers of this capacity from 10 percent to 25 percent,

along with imposing a new 5 percent regulatory duty.

•

To ensure adequate protection for the domestic washing machine

manufacturing industry, I propose imposing a new 20 percent

153

supplementary duty on the import of all types of household

washing machines.

•

To support domestic manufacturers of Velcro discs, which is

widely used in industrial and furniture manufacturing, I propose

fully withdrawing the existing 10 percent supplementary duty on

polyester loop fabrics, the key raw material for Velcro discs.

•

To protect domestic manufacturers of rubber conveyor belts, I

propose increasing the existing import duty on rubber conveyor

belts from 5 percent to 15 percent.

•

To protect domestic producers in the paper industry, I propose

increasing the import duty on greaseproof paper and glassine

paper from 10 percent to 25 percent, along with imposing a 5

percent regulatory duty.

•

To protect the refractory cement industry, I propose reducing

import duty to 5 percent on five key raw materials, including ball

clay.

•

To support domestic carpet manufacturing, I propose fully

withdrawing the existing import duty on polypropylene yarn, the

primary raw material for carpet industry.

•

To ensure appropriate market protection for the domestic maize

starch industry, I propose increasing the import duty on maize

starch from 15 percent to 25 percent.

•

To protect domestic toluene manufacturers, I propose increasing

the existing import duty on toluene from 5 percent to 10 percent.

154

•

To support the domestic detergent manufacturing industry, I

propose setting import duty at only 1 percent on linear alkyl

benzene, one of its key raw materials.

•

To protect domestic manufacturers of cold-rolled and coated

coils and sheets, I propose imposing an additional 10 percent

regulatory duty on the import of cold-rolled coils and sheets.

•

To protect domestic manufacturers of copper wire and copper

tubes, I propose imposing a 10 percent regulatory duty on

imported copper wire and increasing the existing import duty on

copper tubes from 15 percent to 25 percent.

•

To support domestic float glass manufacturers, I propose

reducing import duty on five essential raw materials from 25

percent to 15 percent and including them in the relevant

concessionary notification.

•

To protect domestic production of import substitute aluminum

foil, I propose imposing a 10 percent import duty on finished

aluminum foil.

•

To protect domestic motor manufacturers, I propose imposing a

10 percent regulatory duty on the import of DC motors with

capacity below 1200 watts.

•

To protect the domestic lighter manufacturing industry, I

propose increasing the existing supplementary duty on all types

of lighters and lighter parts to 20 percent.

•

To strengthen the domestic tire and tube manufacturing industry,

I propose granting concessionary duty benefits on the import of

two essential raw materials used in this sector.

155

•

To enhance the competitiveness of domestic skincare and beauty

product manufacturers, I propose reducing the existing 30

percent supplementary duty on two key raw materials to 10

percent.

•

To support the growth of the domestic coffee processing

industry, I propose fully withdrawing the existing 5 percent

regulatory duty on bulk imports of coffee extract, essence, and

preparations used as raw materials.

•

To protect the domestic textile industry, I propose imposing a 5

percent import duty on spandex/elastomeric/elastane and zero

percent import duty on synthetic filament yarn of polypropylene

and carbonized wool.

•

As polyester textured yarn and other polyester-based yarns are

now produced domestically, I propose imposing a 5 percent

import duty on these items.

•

To protect the domestic polyester staple fibre industry, I propose

imposing a 5 percent import duty on polyester staple fibre.

Proposals Related to Notifications

1) Issuance of a New Notification on Concessions for Imported

Industrial Raw Materials

•

To support the broad expansion of the industrial sector and

promote employment through the growth of domestic industries,

I propose issuing a new notification granting concessionary duty

benefits on the imported industrial raw materials.

156

2) Inclusion of the Service Sector in the Advance Tax Exemption for

Capital Machinery

•

Considering the public importance of service-oriented sectors

such as hospitals, universities, and other social institutions, I

propose extending exemption on Advance Tax, currently

applicable for manufacturing industries, to service-sector

institutions for the import of capital machinery and parts. This

will help reduce the cost of healthcare, medical education, and

general education.

3) Extension of Concessionary Benefits for Import of ETP

Chemicals

•

I propose extending the existing duty exemption on the import

of chemicals required for operating Effluent Treatment Plants

(ETPs) until 30 June 2027.

4) Extension of Concessionary Benefits for Coal Imports by Power

Plants

•

To ensure long-term energy security in the power sector and to

keep electricity prices affordable, I propose extending the

concessionary duty benefits on coal imports by power plants

until 30 June 2030.

Amendments to the Customs Act, 2023

•

To make the country's overall commercial activities more

dynamic, improve our ranking in the Ease of Doing Business

indicators, and to make revenue administration more modern

157

and business-friendly, I propose amending several sections of

the Customs Act, 2023 and introducing new provisions where

necessary.

•

I also propose amending the First Schedule of the Act to

implement changes in tariff rates, HS codes, and product

descriptions.

Value Added Tax (VAT) Proposals for FY 2026-27

Mr. Speaker,

268.

Value Added Tax (VAT) remains one of the most important

sources of government revenue in Bangladesh. With a view to

increasing the tax-to-GDP ratio, supporting domestic industries,

achieving

sustainable

revenue

growth,

creating

employment

opportunities, attracting foreign investment, reducing the compliance

gap, simplifying VAT accounting procedures, and fostering a business-

friendly environment through deregulation and ease of doing business,

I am pleased to place before this August House the following VAT

proposals.

Simplified Turnover Tax Scheme for Small and Retail Businesses

Mr. Speaker,

269.

Small and retail businesses constitute a vital part of our

economy. Considering the diversity of business activities, locations,

market conditions, and financial capacities across the country, I propose

introducing a simplified turnover tax regime under which small and

158

retail businesses will pay a modest fixed amount of turnover tax based

on business category and location.

Under this scheme, eligible businesses will not be required to maintain

VAT records, preserve invoices, or file VAT returns. Tax payment will

be made through banks or mobile financial services, ensuring a

transparent, hassle-free, and taxpayer-friendly system.

This initiative will broaden the VAT base, encourage voluntary

compliance, and enable small entrepreneurs to participate in the formal

economy with dignity and ease.

Reduction of Excise Duty on Bank Deposits

Mr. Speaker,

To provide relief to small depositors and promote financial inclusion, I

propose increasing the excise duty exemption threshold on bank

deposits from Tk. 300,000 to Tk. 400,000.

Furthermore, in the banking system, multiple accounts are often opened

against a single loan facility, resulting in excise duty being deducted

multiple times. To eliminate this anomaly, I propose that excise duty be

charged only once against a single loan account, irrespective of the

number of associated accounts.

VAT Exemption for the Digital Economy

Mr. Speaker,

270.

Digital content creation has emerged as a new industry in today's

world. Millions of young Bangladeshis are earning income through

159

digital platforms and contributing significantly to our digital economy.

Encouraging

innovation,

entrepreneurship,

and

technological

advancement is our responsibility.

Startup Enterprises

271.

I propose a full exemption from the 15 percent VAT applicable

to services supplied by registered startup enterprises.

I also propose a complete exemption from:

•

15 percent VAT on imported services used by startup

enterprises; and

•

15 percent VAT on the rental of premises and facilities used by

startup enterprises.

These exemptions shall remain in force until 30 June 2035.

Content Creators and Freelancers

272.

To encourage innovation and self-employment among our

youth, I propose a full exemption from the 15 percent VAT currently

applicable to services provided by content creators and freelancers.

Withdrawal of Specific Tax on Mobile SIM Cards

Mr. Speaker,

273.

The Government has undertaken comprehensive reforms in the

ICT and telecommunications sectors to strengthen digital connectivity

and support technological advancement.

160

To make mobile services more affordable and accessible to the general

public, I propose the complete withdrawal of the specific tax of Tk. 300

imposed on each mobile SIM card.

This measure will result in an estimated revenue sacrifice of

approximately Tk. 12 billion, but it will significantly contribute to

digital inclusion and economic participation.

VAT Relief for the Agricultural Sector

Mr. Speaker,

Agriculture remains the backbone of our economy. To reduce

production costs and support our farmers, I propose:

•

Full exemption from the existing 7.5 percent VAT applicable at

the trading stage on all fertilizers used in agriculture; and

•

Full exemption from the 7.5 percent Advance Tax (AT)

applicable at the import stage on all types of agricultural

pesticides.

VAT Relief for the Healthcare Sector

Mr. Speaker,

The out-of-pocket healthcare expenditure borne by Bangladeshi citizens

remains among the highest in the world. To reduce healthcare costs and

improve access to treatment, I propose:

•

Full exemption from the existing 10 percent VAT at the supplier

stage on imported cardiac stents and intraocular lenses.

161

As a result:

•

The price of each cardiac stent is expected to decrease by up to

Tk. 20,000; and

•

The price of each intraocular lens is expected to decrease by up

to Tk. 5,000.

I further propose a full exemption from the 7.5 percent Advance Tax

applicable at the import stage on Blood Tubing Sets used in

hemodialysis treatment, thereby reducing the cost of dialysis for kidney

patients.

Specific Tax Regime for the Jewellery Sector

Mr. Speaker,

To simplify taxation in the jewellery sector, I propose replacing the

existing 5 percent VAT on jewellery services with a specific tax of Tk.

2,500 per Bhori of jewellery.

Incentives for Domestic Industries

Mr. Speaker,

274.

In order to promote local industries, create employment, reduce

import dependence, conserve foreign exchange, and support sustainable

economic growth, I propose the following measures:

•

Extension of conditional VAT exemption facilities for mobile

phone manufacturing and assembly until 30 June 2030;

162

•

Extension of conditional VAT exemption facilities for local

production of computers, laptops, printers, toner cartridges, and

other technology products until 30 June 2030;

•

Introduction of conditional VAT exemption facilities until 2030

for domestic production of hybrid vehicles, plug-in hybrid

vehicles, electric three-wheelers, electric four-wheelers, electric

buses, electric trucks, and conventional internal combustion

engine vehicles;

•

Extension of VAT exemption on metro rail services until 30 June

2028;

•

Reduction of VAT on the local manufacturing of refrigerators,

freezers, air conditioners, and compressors from 15 percent to

7.5 percent until 30 June 2030.

Expansion of the VAT Net

Mr. Speaker,

To widen the VAT base and strengthen compliance, I propose the

necessary legislative amendments to make VAT registration and

possession of a Business Identification Number (BIN) mandatory for

opening a business bank account.

Revenue Enhancement Measures

Mr. Speaker,

275.

To strengthen revenue mobilization, I propose the following

amendments to the VAT and Supplementary Duty Act, 2012:

163

•

Introduction of a specific VAT of Tk. 500 per litre on alcohol

produced in Bangladesh;

•

Imposition of 15 percent VAT at the import stage on selected

high-value frozen fish products;

•

Imposition of 15 percent VAT at the import stage on trees, parts

of trees, and aromatic tree extracts;

•

Revision of specific VAT rates applicable to various steel and

MS products to reflect market realities and revenue

requirements.

Tobacco Taxation: Balancing Revenue and Public Health

Mr. Speaker,

276.

Tobacco taxation remains one of the most effective tools for

protecting public health while generating revenue. Accordingly, I

propose:

Cigarettes

Minimum retail prices per 10 sticks shall be:

•

Low-tier: Tk. 62

•

Medium-tier: Tk. 92

•

High-tier: Tk. 160

•

Premium-tier: Tk. 210

164

Emerging Tobacco Products

Product

Maximum Retail Price Supplementary Duty

Nicotine Pouch

Tk. 500 per 10 grams

40%

Heated Tobacco Tk. 210 per 10 sticks

67%

Combating Illicit Tobacco Trade Through Track and Trace

Technology

Mr. Speaker,

To prevent illicit trade in tobacco products and strengthen revenue

protection, I propose the introduction of a comprehensive Track and

Trace system incorporating the following measures:

•

Real-time monitoring of tobacco production and supply chains;

•

Installation of AI-enabled cameras and automated counting

devices in tobacco manufacturing facilities;

•

Incorporation of QR Codes or AR Codes on cigarette tax stamps;

•

Development of a dedicated mobile application enabling citizens

to report illicit tobacco products directly to the National Board

of Revenue;

•

Introduction of a whistleblower reward scheme for providing

credible information regarding smuggling and illegal tobacco

products;

•

Restricting the import of cigarette paper and bidi paper

exclusively to manufacturers;

•

Prohibiting the sale of cigarette paper and bidi paper to entities

other than authorized manufacturers.

165

Mr. Speaker,

These proposals seek to establish a modern, equitable, investment-

friendly, and technology-driven VAT system that encourages economic

growth, protects consumers, supports domestic industries, and ensures

sustainable revenue mobilization.

I commend these proposals to this August House.

166

Chapter VIII: Improving the Ease of Doing

Business through Deregulation

Deregulation for Improving the Business-Enabling Environment

Mr. Speaker,

277.

Improving the ease of doing business, increasing domestic and

foreign investment, advancing export diversification and, above all,

achieving higher growth require a more dynamic private sector and easy

access to public services for entrepreneurs. These services must be

simple, prompt, transparent and predictable. Accordingly, steps are

being taken to build a modern service-delivery system by reducing time,

cost, uncertainty and administrative complexity in business- and

investment-related services.

278.

Our deregulation initiative is not about dismantling any

necessary law, rule or oversight arrangement. Public interest,

environmental

protection,

safety,

investors'

rights

and

the

Government's legitimate revenue collection will remain fully protected

while service delivery is made simpler. Procedural requirements that

add to the time and cost of doing business, require repeated submission

of the same information or create uncertainty in decision-making will

be made simpler, more transparent and time-bound. Accountability will

also be ensured at every stage of service delivery to close opportunities

for corruption. Where verification is necessary, it will continue; but it

will be conducted under clear rules, within defined timelines and with

the support of technology.

279.

The reform programme will cover approvals for starting a

business, construction and environmental approvals, post-investment

services, tax and customs compliance, external transactions, banking

167

services, access to long-term finance from the capital market and local

licensing arrangements.

Initiatives to Promote Private and Foreign Investment and

Facilitate Business Start-up

Mr. Speaker,

280.

To encourage private and foreign investment and make it easier

to start a business, licensing procedures will be rationalised and a fully

digital Single Window approval system will be introduced. Under this

system, application submission, verification, approval, licensing,

clearance, progress tracking and related services will be completed

through a single online platform. Once a complete application is

received, the applicable services will be delivered within a maximum of

seven days.

281.

A specific Service Level Agreement (SLA) will be set for each

approval and licensing service. If the relevant agency does not provide

its opinion, no-dues confirmation, no-objection or clearance within the

stipulated time, the application will, where applicable, be processed on

the basis of deemed or automatic approval. Monitoring, accountability

and compliance oversight in service delivery will also be strengthened.

282.

An online provisional approval system will be considered for

small and new businesses, so that entrepreneurs can start operations

quickly and complete the required licensing and compliance

requirements within six to twelve months. Company name clearance,

registration application, fee payment and certificate issuance will be

completed online, with company registration to be completed within

forty-eight hours.

168

283.

The process will be simplified so that work permits for foreign

experts and skilled professionals can be issued within seven days and

visas for investors and project-related persons within ten days. Steps

will also be taken to introduce a five-year multiple-entry investor visa

for eligible investors and key project-related persons.

284.

To accelerate the approval and implementation of large and

strategic foreign investment projects, dedicated support officers, support

teams or project-based case managers will be assigned in BIDA, BEZA,

BEPZA and BSCIC. A round-the-clock help desk and a Grievance

Redress System will be introduced for the quick resolution of investors'

queries, complaints and problems. Updates on applications will be

provided through SMS, e-mail, helpline and online tracking facilities.

285.

To strengthen investors' legal protection and international

confidence, bilateral investment treaties will be expanded, and double

taxation avoidance agreements will be updated and implemented

effectively. The effectiveness and implementation progress of existing

agreements will be reviewed regularly.

286.

To simplify local business approvals, trade licence services of

city corporations and municipalities will gradually be integrated with

the investment service system. Application submission, fee payment,

renewal, licence issuance and progress tracking will be available online,

reducing repeated visits to local offices and delays in renewal.

287.

Plug and Play industrial facility packages will be introduced in

selected industrial zones and economic zones. Under this arrangement,

land, infrastructure, electricity, gas, water, road connectivity and initial

approvals will be prepared in advance in a coordinated manner, enabling

entrepreneurs to set up factories and begin production quickly.

288.

Investment-related inter-agency approval, verification and

consultation steps will be simplified, and their progress will be trackable

169

online. The security clearance process for foreign employees will also

be made online and time-bound. This will reduce unnecessary delays

while ensuring that essential security checks are properly completed.

Measures to Modernise Tax, VAT, Customs, Bond and Dispute

Settlement System

Mr. Speaker,

289.

With a view to creating a business-friendly environment and

simplifying relevant rules and procedures, I now present the

deregulation measures being undertaken in income tax, customs and

VAT administration.

XX. Key Deregulation Measures Relating to Income Tax

Mr. Speaker,

290.

From the next fiscal year, corporate taxpayers, alongside

individual taxpayers, will be able to submit corporate tax returns online.

All categories of taxpayers will be able to file returns throughout the

year. Those who submit returns early in the year will receive tax

incentives. Even after the end of the tax year, taxpayers will be able to

submit delayed returns voluntarily.

291.

If the tax deducted at source exceeds the finally assessed tax

liability, taxpayers will receive refunds of the excess amount. The

refund process will be automated and faceless, and the necessary

arrangements are already being put in place. From the next fiscal year,

income taxpayers will receive refunds directly in their bank accounts

without having to visit tax offices. Timely automated refunds will

prevent entrepreneurs' working capital from remaining tied up for long

periods and will improve business cash flow.

170

292.

In income tax and VAT audits, the existing manual audit

selection process is being replaced by a fully automated, software-based

risk selection system without human intervention. This transparent

process will strengthen taxpayers' confidence in the tax system and

reduce unnecessary hassle for compliant taxpayers.

293.

Foreign investors currently have to obtain Tax Residency

Certificates manually from the National Board of Revenue to receive

tax benefits under Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements (DTAAs).

On the basis of the required treaty-related documents, arrangements will

be made to issue these certificates online through the National Single

Window in an automated manner. This will make service delivery

easier, faster and faceless for foreign investors.

294.

Interconnection has been established between ASYCUDA

World and the eReturn system. As a result, importer-taxpayers will

automatically receive credit in eReturn for advance tax paid at the

import stage. Under the proposed reform, the existing provision for

disallowing expenses due to non-deduction of withholding tax will be

abolished, thereby reducing taxpayers' effective tax burden. In line with

international practice, interest expenses will also be allowed on an

accrual basis in computing business income.

295.

The allowable limits for certain essential business expenses,

such as perquisites, entertainment expenses, free samples and

promotional expenses, are proposed to be increased substantially. This

will help reduce the tax liability of business taxpayers.

296.

In addition to back-to-back letters of credit, supplies made in

foreign currency to export-oriented industries through local letters of

credit are proposed to be treated as deemed exports. The scope of

alternative dispute resolution for income tax disputes is also proposed

to be expanded, so that disputes can be resolved more easily without

requiring taxpayers to file formal appeals.

171

Key Deregulation Measures Relating to Customs

Mr. Speaker

297.

The bonded warehouse system has played a transformative role

in the growth and expansion of the readymade garments sector.

However, many other promising export-oriented sectors have not been

able to benefit from this system for various reasons. Therefore,

considering the potential of all export-oriented sectors, alongside the

readymade garments sector, existing bond-related rules are proposed to

be amended so that all sectors can import raw materials under bond

facilities and export finished goods.

298.

To facilitate business, the requirement of annual bond audit for

fully export-oriented compliant readymade garments enterprises is

proposed to be withdrawn. In line with the practice in the readymade

garments sector, the validity of general bonds for fully export-oriented

leather goods and footwear enterprises, and towel, linen and home

textile enterprises, is proposed to be extended from one year to three

years.

299.

Irrespective of commissionerate jurisdiction, units located

within 60 kilometres of the principal establishment are proposed to be

brought under the Continuous Bond facility. The limit on one-time stock

of raw materials in bonded warehouses is proposed to be removed. In

cases of change of ownership of a bond licence, the requirement for both

the previous and new owners to appear in person before the customs

office for interview is proposed to be abolished.

300.

For bonded enterprises, the requirement to obtain Utilisation

Permission (UP) at least 48 hours before expiry of the shipment period

is proposed to be reduced to 24 hours. A notification is also proposed to

allow fully export-oriented enterprises without bond licences to procure

raw materials duty-free against back-to-back letters of credit.

172

301.

To modernise the jewellery industry and promote export

diversification, a new notification is proposed under the bonded

warehouse system to allow duty-free import of raw materials and export

of jewellery produced from those materials in a transparent, orderly and

compliant manner. To expand export-oriented industries and diversify

export products, it is proposed to allow ten new sectors to import raw

materials without a bond licence, only against bank guarantees. These

sectors are motorcycles, speedboats, fish processing, handicrafts,

diversified jute products, diapers and sanitary napkins, crockery, tents,

recycled cotton bags and terry towels. The legal requirement of

minimum 30 per cent value addition for exporting goods produced from

duty-free raw materials imported against bank guarantees without a

bond licence is also proposed to be abolished.

302.

The rate of goods clearance by Authorised Economic Operator

(AEO) enterprises under the system-based self-assessment method is

proposed to be doubled from the current level. At the same time, the

requirement for compliant businesses to submit updated audit reports

when applying for AEO benefits is proposed to be withdrawn.

303.

At present, reliance on government laboratories for verifying the

accuracy and quality of imported goods often creates unintended

congestion at ports and prolongs the clearance process. To remove this

complexity and facilitate business, a new provision is proposed to allow

testing not only in government laboratories but also in private

laboratories recognised by the Bangladesh Accreditation Board and

ISO.

304.

For local pesticide and agrochemical manufacturers, it is

proposed that annual entitlement-based certification from the Ministry

of Agriculture will replace the existing requirement of invoice-based

certification for importing raw materials under concessional facilities.

For small and low-value consignments brought through post or courier,

173

the existing minimum fine of Tk 50,000 for inadvertent general

deviations is proposed to be abolished.

Key Deregulation Measures Relating to Value Added Tax (VAT)

Mr. Speaker,

305.

The process of receiving, verifying and approving VAT refund

applications, and transferring refund amounts directly from the

government treasury to taxpayers' bank accounts through iBAS++, will

be further strengthened through automation. Taxpayers will be able to

receive VAT refunds from home or office through a fully automated

system. From the beginning of the next fiscal year, online submission of

VAT returns through the eVAT system will be made mandatory, similar

to the income tax eReturn system. Taxpayers will be able to submit both

income tax and VAT returns online from home or office.

306.

A separate VAT return form will be introduced for small VAT

payers so that they can submit returns online by providing only a few

essential pieces of information. Necessary legal amendments are

proposed so that a Business Identification Number (BIN) can be issued

instantly once an application is submitted through the eVAT system.

The existing requirement of monthly return submission is proposed to

be withdrawn and replaced by quarterly return submission. Taxpayers

using their own ERP software will be able to submit VAT returns with

one click directly from their own systems.

307.

To simplify the appeal process, it is proposed to reduce the

amount payable for filing appeals in income tax cases: 1 per cent of the

disputed tax at the first appeal stage, 3 per cent at the Tax Appeal

Tribunal stage instead of 10 per cent, and 10 per cent at the High Court

stage instead of 25 per cent. For customs appeals, it is proposed to

reduce the required payment from 10 per cent to 1 per cent at the appeal

174

stage, from 10 per cent to 1 per cent at the tribunal stage, and to 2 per

cent at the High Court stage.

308.

For VAT appeals, instead of the existing requirement of paying

10 per cent of the disputed tax at all stages, it is proposed to allow

appeals on payment of 1 per cent at the Appeal Commissionerate, 1 per

cent at the Tribunal and 2 per cent at the High Court. In all cases, the

discretionary powers of tax officials are proposed to be abolished.

Initiatives to Facilitate Profit and Capital Repatriation, External

Transactions, Banking Services and Digital Financial Transactions

Mr. Speaker

309.

26. A key basis of foreign investors' confidence is clarity in the

rules for lawful profit and capital repatriation and prompt decision-

making. To this end, a thirty-day timeline will be set for processing

applications for repatriation of profits from lawful foreign investment.

Coordination among banking verification, tax-related documents and

approval processes will be strengthened.

310.

Repatriation and reinvestment of proceeds from the sale of

shares or securities purchased through a Non-Resident Investors' Taka

Account (NITA) have been simplified. The requirement for an auditor's

certificate has been withdrawn, and such proceeds may now be credited

directly to the relevant NITA. This will make it possible to complete

repatriation and reinvestment within one working day and will reduce

compliance costs.

311.

Share transfer and capital repatriation for unlisted companies

have been simplified. No valuation report will be required for deal

values of up to Tk 1 crore, and repatriation of deal values of up to Tk

100 crore may be made without prior approval from Bangladesh Bank.

175

For larger transactions, the use of licensed valuation firms will be

introduced to make share valuation more neutral and acceptable.

312.

To bring greater transparency to the valuation process, the

formation of a Certification Board comprising representatives from

Bangladesh Bank, BIDA, BSEC, the National Board of Revenue and the

private sector will be considered. If the reports of approved valuation

firms are accepted, repeated verification and delays in capital

repatriation will be reduced.

313.

To reduce time and cost in foreign trade, gradual relaxation of

the mandatory use of letters of credit will be considered for reliable

importers and low-risk goods. The use of Documents against Payment

(D/P) and Telegraphic Transfer (TT) will be expanded where

appropriate.

314.

Access to domestic financing against foreign bank guarantees or

Standby Letters of Credit (SBLC) has been simplified. Companies

registered in Bangladesh will be able to obtain Taka loans in accordance

with applicable rules, regardless of ownership or control structure. This

will facilitate access to domestic credit and increase financing

flexibility.

315.

The requirement of separate prior approval for each loan from

an Offshore Banking Unit (OBU) will be reviewed. However,

provisions relating to CIB reporting, single borrower limits, loan

classification and provisioning will remain in force. This will make

foreign currency financing faster and reduce unnecessary approval-

related delays.

316.

The approval process for rent, lease, renewal and relocation of

bank business centres or branches has been simplified. Within region-

wise prescribed rent ceilings, such decisions may be taken with the

approval of the bank's board of directors. This will speed up branch

expansion and operational decision-making.

176

317.

The process for opening a Sukuk Investor ID (SIID) for

investment in government Sukuk has been simplified. Prescribed

application forms, required documents and fee structures have been

determined. As a result, investment in government Sukuk will be easier,

more transparent and more investor-friendly.

318.

To strengthen the foundation of the digital economy, Real Time

Gross Settlement (RTGS) will be made more effective. Faster payment

and settlement arrangements will be developed among banks, mobile

financial service providers, payment service providers and related

service platforms. This will reduce dependence on cash and increase

cashless transactions.

319.

The introduction of e-Loan has been allowed to simplify the

receipt and disbursement of small loans. Loans of up to Tk 50,000 may

be provided for a period of twelve months through a fully digital

process. This will improve access to small loans, expand financial

inclusion and reduce customers' time and operational costs.

320.

The use of Pre-Suit Mediation before filing cases for recovery of

defaulted loans has been encouraged. This will reduce lengthy court-

based procedures and costs, resolve loan-related disputes more quickly

and improve recovery efficiency.

321.

Prudential regulations relating to Auto Loan and Personal Loan

have been relaxed to facilitate environment-friendly vehicles and

personal financing. For electric and hybrid vehicles, the Auto Loan limit

has been increased from Tk 60 lakh to Tk 80 lakh, and the debt-equity

ratio from 60:40 to 80:20. The limit for unsecured personal loans has

been increased from Tk 5 lakh to Tk 10 lakh, and secured personal loans

may be provided up to a maximum of Tk 40 lakh.

322.

Guidelines on Credit Card Operations have been updated and

credit limits have been increased. The limit for unsecured credit cards

has been raised from Tk 10 lakh to Tk 20 lakh, and the limit against

securities from Tk 20 lakh to Tk 40 lakh. Banks may introduce new

177

credit cards with the approval of their boards of directors, without prior

approval from Bangladesh Bank.

323.

These initiatives will reduce time, cost and administrative

complexity in lawful profit and capital repatriation, foreign trade,

domestic and foreign financing, banking services, digital lending and

cashless transactions. At the same time, they will strengthen investor

confidence, financial inclusion and the growth of the digital economy.

Measures to Facilitate Capital Mobilisation through the Capital

Market

Mr. Speaker,

324.

A strong capital market is an important source of long-term

financing. If industry, infrastructure, urban development, technology-

driven initiatives and promising businesses rely solely on bank loans,

pressure on the financial sector increases. The capital market will

therefore be made deeper, more diversified, more transparent and more

confidence-inspiring, so that it can serve as an effective platform for

raising long-term capital for productive sectors and promising

companies.

325.

The reasons why sound and promising companies are reluctant

to be listed on the capital market are being reviewed. Unnecessary

complexity, delays, excessive costs, repeated submission of similar

documents, and uncertainty relating to approval and compliance will be

reduced in phases. While safeguarding investor protection, listing

criteria will be made more transparent, realistic and supportive of

growing companies.

326.

The Initial Public Offering (IPO) process will be made simple,

time-bound

and

technology-enabled.

Application

submission,

178

supporting documents, due diligence, fee payment, correction and

approval will be completed online. Information exchange among the

issuing company, issue manager, stock exchange, CDBL and the

regulator will take place through an integrated digital platform. The

possibility of direct listing for eligible and mature companies will also

be reviewed.

327.

To enhance stability in the capital market, participation by

pension funds, insurance companies, Asset Management Companies

(AMCs), mutual funds and other long-term investors will be increased.

New AMCs will be developed, professional fund management will be

strengthened, and the size and number of mutual funds will be increased

by creating greater opportunities to channel long-term savings into

investment.

328.

To increase opportunities for long-term financing, the corporate

bond market will be expanded and arrangements will be made for

issuing municipal bonds to finance local government and urban

infrastructure development. The use of bonds, Sukuk, infrastructure

funds and other financing instruments for long-term public and private

projects will be increased, reducing dependence on bank loans.

329.

To broaden investment opportunities and the range of financial

products, steps will be taken to make the country's first commodity

exchange operational. Existing licences will be activated, necessary

rules will be formulated, technological capacity will be strengthened and

international expert support will be ensured. The usability of Real Estate

Investment Trusts (REITs), Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs), index

hedging and possible currency hedging instruments will also be

reviewed.

330.

The scope for dual listing of domestic companies on regional

stock exchanges and the feasibility of listing selected state-owned

enterprises will be examined. To facilitate participation by non-resident

179

Bangladeshis and foreign investors, the process for opening and

operating NITA accounts will be further simplified.

331.

To strengthen investor confidence, the quality of disclosure,

financial reporting, audit, share valuation, credit rating, IPO

management and research reports of listed companies will be improved.

The responsibilities and liabilities of auditors, valuers, issue managers,

credit rating agencies, research analysts, merchant bankers, broker-

dealers and other market intermediaries will be clarified. Where

necessary, professional liability frameworks and professional indemnity

or liability insurance will be considered.

332.

To make the transfer of shares and funds after transactions faster

and safer, the settlement cycle will be shortened gradually. Although the

T+2 settlement system is currently in place, steps will be taken to move

to T+1, and preparations will be made for T+0 or same-day settlement

in the next phase after ensuring the required technology, risk

management and market infrastructure. Integration of information

systems among BSEC, stock exchanges, CDBL, banks, brokers, issuer

companies and related organisations will be strengthened.

333.

A specialised dispute resolution mechanism for capital market-

related disputes is being reviewed. Where necessary, the possibility of

establishing a special tribunal or fast-track court will be considered, with

legal authority to enforce its decisions. This will increase investor

confidence and strengthen discipline in the market.

334.

These initiatives will transform the capital market from merely

a place for buying and selling shares into a strong platform for raising

long-term capital, financing infrastructure, converting savings into

productive investment and attracting domestic and foreign investment.

180

Initiatives to Simplify Construction, Environmental, Local

Approval and Compliance Processes

Mr. Speaker,

335.

In setting up industrial establishments, delays in site clearance,

environmental clearance, construction approval, fire safety clearance,

land approval and building plan approval delay project implementation

and increase investment costs. While preserving environmental, public

safety, fire safety and urban planning standards, steps are being taken to

deliver these services online, in an integrated manner and within defined

timelines.

336.

Applications for site clearance and environmental clearance for

industrial establishments will be received and processed online. Specific

timelines will be set for each step, including application verification,

necessary inspection, consultation and issuance of clearance.

Information exchange among the service platforms of the relevant

ministries and agencies will be strengthened so that entrepreneurs do not

have to provide the same information repeatedly.

337.

An integrated Single Window System will be introduced for

construction, fire safety, environmental, land and building plan

approvals. Once an online application is received, the relevant agencies

will complete necessary inspections and submit reports online within the

stipulated time; approvals will then be issued from the same platform on

the basis of those reports. This will reduce the need for separate

applications, office-to-office communication and repeated inspections.

338.

A Risk Assessment System will be introduced in approval and

verification processes. Under this system, the level of risk will be

assessed so that low-risk cases receive faster service, while necessary

verification and supervision continue for high-risk cases. This will

181

preserve the quality of verification and reduce entrepreneurs' time, cost

and uncertainty.

339.

A simplified Compliance Framework or compliance policy will

be developed for micro, small and new entrepreneurs. Conditions

relating to licensing, renewal and regular compliance will be simplified.

Through simple guidelines, online support, fixed fees and simplified

renewal arrangements, small entrepreneurs in the informal sector will be

brought into the formal economy.

Mr. Speaker

340.

We will form a high-level task force to ensure the swift and

proper implementation of these deregulatory activities. In addition, we

are developing a dedicated website to properly monitor these activities,

where service recipients will be able to directly submit complaints

regarding irregularities or service delivery issues and learn about their

resolution.

341.

Implementation of these reforms will help build a new

administrative culture in business- and investment-related services. It

will ensure better coordination among agencies, exchange of

information, online progress tracking and service delivery within

defined timelines. As a result, starting and running a business will

become easier, the cost of doing business will fall and investor

confidence will increase. Delays in tax and customs compliance,

external transactions, banking services, capital-market financing,

construction approvals, environmental clearances and local licensing

will be reduced. The private sector will, in turn, be able to play a stronger

role in production, exports, infrastructure development, new

industrialisation and employment creation.

342.

As Bangladesh prepares for post-LDC graduation competition,

a stronger business-enabling environment is increasingly important for

182

export diversification, higher investment flows, productive employment

and sustainable growth. This deregulation-related reform programme is

a practical step towards that objective. Through it, we seek to build a

Bangladesh where entrepreneurs invest with confidence, investors can

plan for the long term, and the benefits of economic activity reach more

people.

183

Chapter IX: Conclusion

Mr. Speaker

343.

I seek the cooperation of the Mr. Members of this National

Parliament, as well as of our farmers, workers, students, women, youth,

entrepreneurs, professionals, expatriates, and citizens from all walks of

life, regardless of their religion, race, ethnicity, social class, or

profession.

We

firmly

believe

that

through

the

continued

implementation of our electoral commitments, bold reform initiatives,

and a united national effort, Bangladesh will advance steadily toward its

development aspirations.

344.

Our commitment is to build a Bangladesh where equal

opportunities are available to all, where enterprise and innovation are

encouraged, where the rewards of hard work are ensured, and where the

benefits of economic progress rare shared by every citizen. Through

economic democratisation, deregulation, and the empowerment of the

people, we shall build a prosperous and confident Bangladesh, Insha-

Allah.

345.

We recognize that the strength, creativity, and entrepreneurial

spirit of our people are our greatest national asset. By nurturing this

potential, we seek to overcome challenges, transform opportunities into

outcomes, and, build, through collective endeavour, a self-reliant and

dignified Bangladesh that reflects the aspirations of the masses.

346.

We envision a prosperous future where the pride of a

transformed Bangladesh belongs to all.

Mr Speaker

Thank you very much.

Bangladesh Zindabad.

184

Appendix-A

Table-1: Supplementary Budget for FY 2025-26

(Crore Tk.)

Sector

Budget

2025-26

Revised

2025-26

Actual

2025-26

(Up to March 2026P)

1

2

3

4

Total Revenue Income

5,64,000

5,88,000

3,31,137

(9.0)

(9.7)

(5.4)

NBR Tax

4,99,000

5,03,000

2,83,924

Non-NBR Tax

19,000

20,000

6,317

Non Tax Receipt

46,000

65,000

40,896

Total Expenditure

7,90,000

7,88,000

4,05,305

(12.7)

(13.0)

(6.7)

Operating Recurrent Expenditure

4,98,783

5,13,362

3,13,820

(8.0)

(8.4)

(5.2)

Development Expenditure

2,45,609

2,14,862

57,072

(3.9)

(3.5)

(0.9)

In which, Annual Development

Programme

2,30,000

2,00,000

55,849

(3.7)

(3.3)

(0.9)

Operating Capital and Other Expenditure

45,608

59,776

34,413

(0.7)

(1.0)

(0.6)

Budget Deficit

-2,26,000

-2,00,000

-74,168

(-3.6)

(-3.3)

(-1.0)

Financing

External Source (Including Grants)

1,01,000

63,000

-7,677

(1.6)

(1.0)

(-0.1)

Domestic Source

1,25,000

1,37,000

82,243

(2.0)

(2.3)

(1.4)

In which, Banking Source

1,04,000

1,18,000

1,02,442

(1.7)

(1.9)

(1.7)

GDP

62,44,578A

60,80,320P

60,80,320P

Source: Finance Division; Figures in parenthesis indicate percent of GDP; A=Projected Nominal GDP at

the time of budget preparation; P= Provisional

Table-2: Proposed Budget Structure for FY 2026-27

185

(Crore Tk.)

Sector

Budget

2026-27

Revised

2025-26

Budget

2025-26

Actual

2024-25

1

2

3

4

5

Total Revenue Income

6,95,000

5,88,000

5,64,000

4,37,029

(10.2)

(9.7)

(9.0)

(7.9)

In which,

NBR Tax

6,04,000

5,03,000

4,99,000

3,69,528

Non-NBR Tax

25,000

20,000

19,000

8,192

Non-Tax Receipt

66,000

65,000

46,000

59,309

Total Expenditure

9,38,000

7,88,000

7,90,000

6,31,273

(13.7)

(13.0)

(12.7)

(11.4)

(a)

Operating

Recurrent

Expenditure

5,51,087

5,13,362

4,98,783

4,61,743

(8.1)

(8.4)

(8.0)

(8.4)

(b) Development Expenditure

3,16,075

2,14,862

2,45,609

1,52,449

(4.6)

(3.5)

(3.9)

(2.8)

In which,

Annual Development Programme

3,00,000

2,00,000

2,30,000

1,42,326

(4.4)

(3.3)

(3.7)

(2.6)

(c) Operating Capital and other

Expenditure

70,838

59,776

45,608

17,081

(1.0)

(1.0)

(0.7)

(0.3)

Budget Deficit

-2,43,000

-2,00,000

-2,26,000

-1,94,244

(-3.6)

(-3.3)

(-3.6)

(-3.5)

Financing

(a) External source (Including Grants)

1,16,000

63,000

1,01,000

60,430

(1.7)

(1.0)

(1.6)

(1.1)

(b) Domestic Source

1,27,000

1,37,000

1,25,000

1,25,383

(1.9)

(2.3)

(2.0)

(2.3)

In which, Banking Source

1,12,000

1,18,000

1,04,000

1,14,161

(1.6)

(1.9)

(1.7)

(2.1)

GDP

68,30,024A

60,80,320P

62,44,578P

55,15,026

Source: Finance Division; Figures in parenthesis indicate percent of GDP; A= Estimated Nominal GDP at

the time of budget preparation; P= Provisional estimate of nominal GDP

186

Table-3: Sectoral Allocation of Annual Development Programme

(Crore Tk.)

Ministry/Division

Budget

2026-27

Revised

2025-26

Budget

2025-26

Actual

2024-25

Actual

2023-24

1

2

3

4

5

6

(a) Human Resource

1. Ministry of Primary and Mass Education

21,441

8,061

11,398

7,429

7,231

(7.1)

(4.0)

(5.0)

(5.2)

(3.7)

2. Health Services Division

26,806

3,117

11,617

2,001

7,366

(8.9)

(1.6)

(5.1)

(1.4)

(3.7)

3.

Secondary

and

Higher

Education

Division

20,835

6,190

13,625

4,753

4,965

(6.9)

(3.1)

(5.9)

(3.3)

(2.5)

4. Others

59,344

28,437

32,833

19,281

26,393

(19.8)

(14.2)

(14.3)

(13.5)

(13.4)

Sub-Total 1,28,426

45,805

69,473

33,464

45,955

(42.8)

(22.9)

(30.2)

(23.5)

(23.4)

(b) Agriculture and Rural Development

5. Local Government Division

33,735

38,566

36,099

30,701

36,713

(11.2)

(19.3)

(15.7)

(21.6)

(18.7)

6. Ministry of Water Resousces

7,833

10,582

8,490

9,895

11,733

(2.6)

(5.3)

(3.7)

(7.0)

(6.0)

7. Ministry of Agriculture

7,946

4,044

6,333

3,411

4,199

(2.6)

(2.0)

(2.8)

(2.4)

(2.1)

8. Others

4,275

4,553

4,784

3,395

4,764

(1.4)

(2.3)

(2.1)

(2.4)

(2.4)

Sub-Total

53,789

57,745

55,706

47,402

57,409

(17.9)

(28.9)

(24.2)

(33.3)

(29.2)

(c) Energy Infrastructure

9. Power Division

14,939

15,531

20,284

21,095

27,314

(5.0)

(7.8)

(8.8)

(14.8)

(13.9)

10. Energy and Mineral Resources Division

2,254

1,279

2,086

919

1,163

(0.8)

(0.6)

(0.9)

(0.6)

(0.6)

Sub-Total

17,193

16,810

22,370

22,014

28,477

(5.7)

(8.4)

(9.7)

(15.5)

(14.5)

(d) Communication Infrastructure

11. Ministry of Railway

5,440

4,924

7,715

2,980

11,177

(1.8)

(2.5)

(3.4)

(2.1)

(5.7)

12. Road Transport and Highways Division

30,741

19,950

32,330

13,766

19,890

(10.2)

(10.0)

(14.1)

(9.7)

(10.1)

13. Bridges Division

2,898

5,319

6,012

4,176

7,485

(1.0)

(2.7)

(2.6)

(2.9)

(3.8)

14. Others

10,032

7,245

11,789

8,868

9,621

(3.3)

(3.6)

(5.1)

(6.2)

(4.9)

Sub-Total

49,111

37,438

57,846

29,790

48,173

(16.4)

(18.7)

(25.2)

(20.9)

(24.5)

Total 2,48,519

1,57,798

2,05,395

1,32,670

1,80,014

(82.8)

(78.9)

(89.3)

(93.2)

(91.6)

15. Others

51,481

42,202

24,605

9,657

16,472

187

(Crore Tk.)

Ministry/Division

Budget

2026-27

Revised

2025-26

Budget

2025-26

Actual

2024-25

Actual

2023-24

1

2

3

4

5

6

(17.2)

(21.1)

(10.7)

(6.8)

(8.4)

Total ADP

3,00,000

2,00,000

2,30,000

1,42,327

1,96,486

Source: Finance Division; Figures in parenthesis indicate percent of total ADP allocation.

188

Table-4: Sectoral Allocation in overall Budget

(Crore Tk.)

Ministry/Division

Budget

2026-27

Revised

2025-26

Budget

2025-26

Actual

2024-25

Actual

2023-24

Actual

2022-23

Actual

2021-22

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

(a) Social Infrastructure

2,79,001 1,83,574 2,07,629 1,45,899 1,51,991 1,44,923

1,42,568

(29.74)

(23.30)

(26.28)

(23.11)

(24.79)

(25.25)

(27.41)

Human Resource

1. Secondary and Higher

Education Division

57,301

41,753

47,563

36,474

32,276

30,496

28,970

(6.11)

(5.30)

(6.02)

(5.78)

(5.26)

(5.31)

(5.57)

2. Ministry of Primary and

Mass Education

46,738

31,719

35,403

25,887

26,231

23,815

23,440

(4.98)

(4.03)

(4.48)

(4.10)

(4.28)

(4.15)

(4.51)

3.

Health

Services

Division

49,387

21,934

31,022

14,763

18,932

17,664

20,582

(5.27)

(2.78)

(3.93)

(2.34)

(3.09)

(3.08)

(3.96)

4. Others

1,06,286

69,853

74,957

54,693

58,301

57,745

55,622

(11.33)

(8.86)

(9.49)

(8.66)

(9.51)

(10.06)

(10.70)

Sub-Total 2,59,712 1,65,259 1,88,945 1,31,817 1,35,740 1,29,720

1,28,614

(27.69)

(20.97)

(23.92)

(20.88)

(22.14)

(22.60)

(24.73)

Food and Social Safety

5. Ministry of Food

8,939

9,246

8,322

7,332

6,415

5,014

5,310

(0.95)

(1.17)

(1.05)

(1.16)

(1.05)

(0.87)

(1.02)

6. Ministry of Disaster

Management

10,350

9,069

10,362

6,750

9,836

10,189

8,644

(1.10)

(1.15)

(1.31)

(1.07)

(1.60)

(1.78)

(1.66)

Sub-Total

19,289

18,315

18,684

14,082

16,251

15,203

13,954

(2.06)

(2.32)

(2.37)

(2.23)

(2.65)

(2.65)

(2.68)

(b) Physical Infrastructure

1,74,988 1,64,510 1,90,360 1,48,047 1,93,201 1,90,694

1,63,964

(18.66)

(20.88)

(24.10)

(23.45)

(31.51)

(33.22)

(31.53)

Agriculture and Rural Development

7. Ministry of Agriculture

28,881

24,825

27,224

23,891

31,971

32,531

21,334

(3.08)

(3.15)

(3.45)

(3.78)

(5.21)

(5.67)

(4.10)

8.

Ministry

of

Water

Resources

10,533

13,382

11,204

12,254

14,113

10,889

9,400

(1.12)

(1.70)

(1.42)

(1.94)

(2.30)

(1.90)

(1.81)

9.

Local

Government

Division

40,246

44,243

42,433

35,972

42,024

38,664

34,003

(4.29)

(5.61)

(5.37)

(5.70)

(6.85)

(6.74)

(6.54)

10. Others

9,970

9,933

10,302

8,100

9,360

8,087

8,109

(1.06)

(1.26)

(1.30)

(1.28)

(1.53)

(1.41)

(1.56)

Sub-Total

89,630

92,383

91,163

80,217

97,468

90,171

72,846

(9.56)

(11.72)

(11.54)

(12.71)

(15.90)

(15.71)

(14.01)

Power and Energy

17,345

16,951

22,520

22,111

28,568

27,065

22,738

(1.85)

(2.15)

(2.85)

(3.50)

(4.66)

(4.72)

(4.37)

Communication Infrastructure

11. Road Transport and

Highways Division

36,918

25,685

38,496

18,030

24,819

31,705

30,158

(3.94)

(3.26)

(4.87)

(2.86)

(4.05)

(5.52)

(5.80)

12. Ministry of Railway

9,940

9,153

11,944

6,850

14,736

14,693

14,800

(1.06)

(1.16)

(1.51)

(1.09)

(2.40)

(2.56)

(2.85)

13. Bridges Division

2,908

5,326

6,022

4,179

7,489

6,947

5,571

(0.31)

(0.68)

(0.76)

(0.66)

(1.22)

(1.21)

(1.07)

189

(Crore Tk.)

Ministry/Division

Budget

2026-27

Revised

2025-26

Budget

2025-26

Actual

2024-25

Actual

2023-24

Actual

2022-23

Actual

2021-22

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

14. Others

10,964

8,128

12,734

10,438

10,611

9,841

8,510

(1.17)

(1.03)

(1.61)

(1.65)

(1.73)

(1.71)

(1.64)

Sub Total

60,730

48,292

69,196

39,497

57,655

63,186

59,039

(6.47)

(6.13)

(8.76)

(6.26)

(9.40)

(11.01)

(11.35)

15. Other Sector

7,283

6,884

7,481

6,222

9,510

10,272

9,341

(0.78)

(0.87)

(0.95)

(0.99)

(1.55)

(1.79)

(1.80)

(c) General Services

2,45,117 2,10,615 1,78,517 1,02,297 1,07,408

92,707

1,03,584

(26.13)

(26.73)

(22.60)

(16.20)

(17.52)

(16.15)

(19.92)

Public Order and Safety

33,764

33,629

33,542

29,244

28,701

25,788

26,271

(3.60)

(4.27)

(4.25)

(4.63)

(4.68)

(4.49)

(5.05)

16. Others

2,11,353 1,76,986 1,44,975

73,053

78,707

66,919

77,313

(22.53)

(22.46)

(18.35)

(11.57)

(12.84)

(11.66)

(14.87)

Total 6,99,106 5,58,699 5,76,506 3,96,243 4,52,600 4,28,324

4,10,116

(74.5)

(70.9)

(73.0)

(62.8)

(73.8)

(74.6)

(78.9)

(d) Interest Payments

1,27,500 1,27,000 1,22,000 1,36,123 1,14,662

92,116

77,823

(13.59)

(16.12)

(15.44)

(21.56)

(18.70)

(16.05)

(14.96)

(e)

PPP

Subsidy

and

Liability

95,209

96,701

82,420

98,396

55,552

54,082

34,786

(10.15)

(12.27)

(10.43)

(15.59)

(9.06)

(9.42)

(6.69)

(f) Net Landing and Other

Expenditure

16,185

5,600

9,074

514

-9,732

-562

-2,670

(1.73)

(0.71)

(1.15)

(0.08)

(-1.59)

(-0.10)

(-0.51)

Total Budget 9,38,000 7,88,000 7,90,000 6,31,276 6,13,082 5,73,960

5,20,055

Source: Finance Division; Figures in parenthesis indicate percent of total budget

190

Table-5: Ministry/Division-wise Budget Allocation

(Crore Tk.)

Ministry/

Division Code

Ministry/Division

Budget

2026-27

Revised

2025-26

Budget

2025-26

101

President's Office

34

30

34

102

National Parliament

291

249

232

103

Prime Minister's Office

3,846

3,485

3,556

104

Cabinet Division

105

132

116

105

Bangladesh Supreme Court

291

270

250

106

Election Commission Secretariat

4,401

4,346

2,956

107

Ministry of Public Administration

5,067

4,610

5,019

108

Bangladesh Public Service Commission

138

179

149

109

Finance Division

3,19,802

2,89,998

2,61,383

110

Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of

Bangladesh

377

237

284

111

Internal Resources Division

4,656

2,965

3,126

112

Financial Institutions Division

3,566

5,212

3,521

113

Economic Relations Division

23,249

22,628

22,584

114

Planning Division

36,251

28,402

10,906

115

Implementation

Monitoring

&

Evaluation

Division

231

205

183

116

Statistics and Informatics Division

672

417

467

117

Ministry of Commerce

328

910

608

118

Ministry of Foreign Affairs

1,844

1,764

1,704

119

Ministry of Defense

42,497

40,662

40,851

120

Armed Forces Division

44

40

47

121

Law and Justice Division

2,188

2,160

2,075

122

Ministry of Home Affairs

31,099

27,173

27,001

123

Legislative and Parliamentary Affairs Division

49

48

47

124

Ministry of Primary and Mass Education

46,738

31,719

35,403

125

Secondary and Higher Education Division

57,302

41,754

47,564

126

Ministry of Science and Technology

18,115

12,704

12,869

127

Health Service Division

49,387

21,934

31,022

128

Information and Communication Technology

Division

2,049

2,866

2,144

129

Ministry of Social Welfare

30,443

13,453

13,991

130

Ministry of Women and Children Affairs

5,196

5,371

5,078

131

Ministry of Labour and Employment

467

389

438

132

Ministry of Housing and Public Works

5,079

4,822

5,110

133

Ministry of Information and Broadcasting

1,190

1,223

1,110

134

Ministry of Cultural Affairs

826

753

824

135

Ministry of Religious Affairs

2,955

2,403

2,183

136

Ministry of Youth and Sports

2,586

1,804

2,423

137

Local Government Division

40,246

44,243

42,433

138

Rural Government and Co-operatives Division

1,106

990

1,100

191

(Crore Tk.)

Ministry/

Division Code

Ministry/Division

Budget

2026-27

Revised

2025-26

Budget

2025-26

139

Ministry of Industries

1,692

1,582

1,891

140

Ministry of Expatriates Welfare and Overseas

Employment

880

931

855

141

Ministry of Textiles and Jute

512

480

480

142

Energy and Mineral Resources Division

2,349

1,366

2,178

143

Ministry of Agriculture

28,881

24,825

27,224

144

Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock

2,728

3,346

3,392

145

Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate

Change

2,240

1,837

2,144

146

Ministry of Land

2,439

2,401

2,304

147

Ministry of Water Resources

10,533

13,382

11,204

148

Ministry of Food

11,726

8,955

9,004

149

Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief

10,350

9,069

10,362

150

Road Transport and Highways Division

36,918

25,685

38,496

151

Ministry of Railway

9,940

9,153

11,944

152

Ministry of Shipping

9,080

6,828

10,279

153

Ministry of Civil Aviation and Tourism

1,884

1,300

2,455

154

Posts and Telecommunications Division

2,141

1,987

2,148

155

Ministry of Chittagong Hill Tracts Affairs

1,457

1,359

1,362

156

Power Division

14,996

15,586

20,342

157

Ministry of Liberation War Affairs

7,515

7,452

7,330

158

Anti Corruption Commission

197

203

191

159

Bridges Division

2,908

5,326

6,022

160

Technical and Madrasha Education Division

18,457

12,396

12,678

161

Security Services Division

0

3,880

4,038

162

Health Education and Family Welfare Division

13,466

6,121

10,886

Total

9,38,000

7,88,000

7,90,000

Source: Finance Division

192

Appendix B

Table-1: Tax-Free Income Threshold for Individual Taxpayers

and Hindu Undivided Families (HUF)

Category of Taxpayer

Tax Years 2026-

27 & 2027-28

Tax Years

2028-29 &

2029-30

Tax Year

2030-31

General taxpayer

Tk. 3,75,000

Tk. 4,00,000

Tk. 4,50,000

Female taxpayers and

taxpayers aged 65 years

or above

Tk. 4,25,000

Tk. 4,50,000

Tk. 5,00,000

Taxpayer with disability

Tk. 5,00,000

Tk. 5,25,000

Tk. 5,75,000

Gazette-listed

war-

wounded

Freedom

Fighter taxpayer

Tk. 5,25,000

Tk. 5,50,000

Tk. 6,00,000

Gazette-listed

injured

"July Warrior" of the

July 2024 Mass Uprising

Tk. 5,25,000

Tk. 5,50,000

Tk. 6,00,000

Third-gender taxpayer

Tk. 5,00,000

Tk. 5,25,000

Tk. 5,75,000

Note: For each child/dependent with disability, the tax-free threshold of a parent or

legal guardian shall be increased by Tk. 50,000. Where both parents are taxpayers,

either one may claim this benefit.

193

Table-2: Tax Slabs and Tax Rates for Individual Taxpayers and

Hindu Undivided Families (HUF)

Tax Years

2026-27 &

2027-28

Rate

Tax Years 2028-

29 & 2029-30

Rate

Tax Year 2030-

31

Rate

Up to Tk.

3,75,000

Nil

Up to Tk.

4,00,000

Nil

Up to Tk.

4,50,000

Nil

Next Tk.

3,00,000

10%

Next Tk. 3,00,000

10%

Next Tk. 3,00,000

10%

Next Tk.

4,00,000

15%

Next Tk. 4,00,000

15%

Next Tk. 4,00,000

15%

Next Tk.

5,00,000

20%

Next Tk. 5,00,000

20%

Next Tk. 5,00,000

20%

Next Tk.

20,00,000

25%

Next Tk.

20,00,000

25%

Next Tk.

2,000,000

25%

Remaining

amount

30%

Next Tk.

2,64,00,000

30%

Next Tk.

2,63,50,000

30%

-

-

Remaining

amount

35%

Remaining

amount

35%

194

Table-3: Tax Rates for Companies, Associations of Persons, Firms,

Trusts and Other Taxpayers (Tax Years 2026-27 to 2030-31)

Description

Tax

Rate

Rebate / Conditional Rate

Publicly traded company having at

least 10% of paid-up capital

transferred through IPO (Initial

Public Offering) or Direct Listing

22.5%

If all income transactions are

conducted through bank transfer

during the relevant income year,

tax rate will be 20%

Companies as defined in the

Section 2, subsection (31) of

Income Tax Act, 2023 (Act No. 12

of 2023)

27.5%

If all income transactions are

conducted through bank transfer

during the relevant income year,

tax rate will be 25%

Publicly traded banks, insurance

companies and finance companies

37.5%

No rebate applicable

Non-publicly

traded

banks,

insurance companies and finance

companies

40%

No rebate applicable

Companies

manufacturing

cigarettes, bidis, zarda, gul and all

other tobacco products

45%

+ 2.5%

surcharge

No rebate applicable

Mobile phone operator companies

45%

If at least 10% of paid-up capital

(with Pre-IPO Placement not

exceeding 5%) is transferred

through a stock exchange and

the company becomes publicly

traded, the applicable provisions

shall apply. If at least 20% of

paid-up

capital

is

offered

through IPO, the company will

enjoy a 10% tax rebate on the

applicable income tax for the

relevant year.

Non-resident

taxpayers

in

Bangladesh

(other

than

Non-

30%

No rebate applicable

195

Resident Bangladeshis), excluding

companies, firms and associations

of persons

Non-company taxpayers earning

income

from

manufacturing

cigarettes, bidis, zarda, gul and all

other tobacco products

45%

+ 2.5%

surcharge

No rebate applicable

Trusts, firms and associations of

persons

27.5%

No rebate applicable

Cooperative societies

20%

No rebate applicable

Private

universities,

private

medical colleges, private dental

colleges,

private

engineering

colleges,

or

private

colleges

engaged exclusively in information

technology education

10%

No rebate applicable

196

Table-1(a): Proposal to Reduce Customs Duty (CD) on 69

Products

HS Code

Description of Goods

Existing

CD (%)

Proposed

CD (%)

0105.11.90

Live Fowls Gallus, Domesticus<=185g,

Excl.Parent Stock of One Day Chic

25

15

0105.12.90

Live

Turkeys

Weighing

<=185g,

(Excl.Parent Stock Of One Day Chick)

25

15

0105.13.90

Other ducks

25

15

0105.14.90

Other Geese

25

15

0105.94.00

Fowls of the species Gallus domesticus

25

15

0105.99.00

Live Ducks, Geese, Turkeys And Guinea

Fowls Weighing >185g

25

15

0106.33.00

Ostriches;

emus

(Dromaius

novaehollandiae)

25

15

0206.10.90

Fresh Or Chilled Edible Offal Of Bovine

Animals, Nes

25

15

0206.21.90

Frozen Bovine Tounge, Nes

25

15

0206.22.90

Frozen Bovine Livers, Nes

25

15

0206.29.90

Frozen Edible Bovine Offal (Excl.

Tongues And Livers), Nes

25

15

0207.13.90

Fresh Or Chilled Cuts And Offal Of

Chickens, Nes

25

15

0207.14.10

Frozen Cuts And Offal Of Chicken,

Wrapped/Canned upto 2.5 kg

25

15

0210.99.90

Meat And Edible Meat Offal,Salted,In

Brine,Dried Or Smoked,Other, Nes

25

15

0302.11.90

Fresh Or Chill. Trout (Excl. Livers &

Roes),Nes

25

15

0302.21.90

Fresh Or Chilled Halibut (Excl. Livers &

Roes),NES

25

15

0302.24.90

Other Turbots (Psetta maxima)

25

15

0303.31.90

Frozen Halibut (Excl. Livers & Roes),nes

25

15

0303.65.90

Coalfish (Pollachius virens), EXCL.

Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

25

15

0303.67.10

Alaska

Pollack

(Theraga

chalcogramma)Wrapped/canned upto 2.5

Kg

25

15

197

HS Code

Description of Goods

Existing

CD (%)

Proposed

CD (%)

0303.67.90

Other

Alaska

Pollack

(Theraga

chalcogramma)

25

15

0303.89.90

Other fish, excluding livers and roes :

Other

25

15

0303.91.90

Livers, roes and milt : Other

25

15

0305.20.90

Livers And Roed, Dried,Smoked,Salted

Or In Brine,Nes

25

15

0305.32.90

Fish of the families Bregmacerotidae,

Euclichthyidae, .., EXCL.Wrappe

25

15

0305.53.90

Fish of the families Bregmacerotidae,

Euclichthyidae, Gadidae, Macrou

25

15

0305.61.90

Herrings Salted Or In Brine But Not Dried

Or Smoked, Nes

25

15

0305.69.90

Other Fish,Nes,Salted Salted Or In Brine

But Not Dried Or Smoked, Nes

25

15

0305.71.90

Other Shark fins

25

15

0305.72.10

Fish

heads,

tails

and

maws

Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

25

15

0305.72.90

Other Fish heads, tails and maws

25

15

0305.79.90

Other edible fish offal :

25

15

0306.14.00

Frozen Crabs

25

15

0306.19.00

Frozen

Crustaceans,Nes

(Incl.Flours/Meals/Pellets)Fit For Human

Consu

25

15

0306.99.90

Other, including flours, meals and pellets

of crustaceans, fit for hu

25

15

0307.11.10

Oysters,

Live,

fresh

or

chilled,

Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

25

15

0307.11.90

Oysters, Live, fresh or chilled, EXCL.

Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

25

15

0307.12.10

Oysters, Frozen, Wrapped/canned upto

2.5 kg

25

15

0307.12.90

Oysters, Frozen, Excl. Wrapped/canned

upto 2.5 kg

25

15

0307.21.10

Scallops,

Live,

Fresh

Or

Chilled

Wrapped/Canned Upto 2.5kg

25

15

0307.21.90

Scallops, Live, Fresh Or Chilled,Nes

25

15

198

HS Code

Description of Goods

Existing

CD (%)

Proposed

CD (%)

0307.22.10

Scallops, including queen scallops, ..

frozen Wrapped/canned upto 2.5

25

15

0307.29.90

Other Live, Fresh Or Chilled, Nes

25

15

0307.31.10

Mussels,Live,Fresh

Or

Chilled

Wrapped/Canned upto 2.5kg

25

15

0307.31.90

Mussels, Live, Fresh Or Chilled,Nes

25

15

0307.39.90

Other

live,fresh

or

chilled

mussels(excl.mytilus spp.,perna spp.),nes

25

15

0307.49.90

Oth.cuttle

fish(excl.sepia

officinalis,rossia macrosoma,sepiola ..),n

25

15

0307.60.90

Snails, Other Than Sea Snails,Nes

25

15

0307.71.90

Live, fresh or chilled Clams, cockles and

ark shells .., Solecurtid

25

15

0307.72.10

Clams, cockles and ark shells…,

Donacidae, Hi, Frozen, Wrapped/c

25

15

0307.79.90

Other Clams, cockles and ark shells

(families Arcidae, . and Veneri

25

15

0307.82.10

Live, fresh or chilled stromboid conchs

(Strombus spp.)

25

15

0307.84.10

Frozen stromboid conchs (Strombus spp.)

Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 kg

25

15

0307.91.90

Aquantic

Invert.(Excl.

Crustaceans),Live,Fresh

Or

Chilled,Nes(Excl.Wr

25

15

0307.99.10

Oth.,incl.flours,meals

and pellets

of

aquatic.,not fresh or chilled,w

25

15

0307.99.90

Oth.,incl. Flours, meals and pellets of

aquatic..,not fresh or chille

25

15

3703.10.00

Photographic paper, paperboard and

textiles..,in rolls of a width exc

25

5

3703.20.00

Color Photography Paper

10

5

3703.90.00

Other

photographic

paper..,(excl.in

rolls..,for colour photography(po

25

5

3706.10.90

Other Cinematograph Film, Exposed And

Developed, Width >=35mm

25

5

3706.90.90

Other Cinematograph Film, Exposed And

Developed, Width <35mm

25

5

199

HS Code

Description of Goods

Existing

CD (%)

Proposed

CD (%)

3806.20.00

Salts Of Resin/Res.Acids Or Of Deriv'S

Rosin/Resin Acids,Excl.Rosin A

25

15

4421.20.00

Statuettes and other ornaments : Coffins

25

10

7011.10.00

Glass

envelopes

(incl.bulbs

and

tubes),open and glass parts..,for ele

25

10

8528.42.00

Capable of directly connecting to and

designed for use with an automa

25

5

8539.21.90

Other Tungsten Halogen Filament Lamps

(Excl.Ultra-Violet Or Infra-Red

25

5

8545.19.90

Carbon electrodes (excl. for furnaces), nes

25

10

8545.20.00

Carbon Brushes

25

10

8545.90.90

Articles Of Graphite Or Other Carbon,

Nes, For Electrical Purposes, N

25

10

Table-1(b): Proposal to Withdraw Supplementary Duty on 9 Products

HSCODE

DESCRIPTION

Existing

SD

Rate

Proposed

SD Rate

0206.10.90

Fresh Or Chilled Edible Offal of Bovine

Animals, Nes

10

0

0206.21.90

Frozen Bovine Tongue, Nes

10

0

0206.22.90

Frozen Bovine Livers, Nes

10

0

0206.29.90

Frozen Edible Bovine Offal (Excl. Tongues

and Livers), Nes

10

0

0207.41.90

Other meat and edible offal of not cut in

pieces, fresh or chilled

10

0

0207.42.10

Meat and edible offal of not cut in pieces,

frozen of ducks

10

0

8527.21.00

Combined

with

sound

recording

or

reproducing apparatus

10

0

8527.91.00

Combined

with

sound

recording

or

reproducing apparatus

10

0

8539.21.90

Other Tungsten Halogen Filament Lamps

(Excl.Ultra-Violet or Infra-Red

10

0

200

Table-1(c): Proposal to Withdraw Regulatory Duty on 113 Products

Sl.No.

HSCODE

DESCRIPTION

1

0105.11.90

Live Fowls Gallus,Domesticus<=185g, Excl.Parent Stock Of One

Day Chic

2

0105.12.90

Live Turkeys Weighing <=185g, (Excl.Parent Stock Of One Day

Chick)

3

0105.13.90

Other ducks

4

0105.14.90

Other Geese

5

0105.94.00

Fowls of the species Gallus domesticus

6

0105.99.00

Live Ducks, Geese, Turkeys And Guinea Fowls Weighing >185g

7

0106.33.00

Ostriches; emus ( Dromaius novaehollandiae)

8

0206.10.90

Fresh Or Chilled Edible Offal Of Bovine Animals, Nes

9

0206.21.90

Frozen Bovine Tounge, Nes

10

0206.22.90

Frozen Bovine Livers, Nes

11

0206.29.90

Frozen Edible Bovine Offal (Excl. Tongues And Livers), Nes

12

0210.99.90

MEAT AND EDIBLE MEAT OFFAL,SALTED,IN BRINE,DRIED

OR SMOKED,OTHER, Nes

13

0302.11.90

Fresh Or Chill. Trout (Excl. Livers & Roes),Nes

14

0302.21.90

Fresh Or Chilled Halibut (Excl. Livers & Roes),NES

15

0302.24.90

Other Turbots (Psetta maxima)

16

0303.31.90

Frozen Halibut (Excl. Livers & Roes),nes

17

0303.65.90

Coalfish (Pollachius virens), EXCL. Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

18

0303.67.10

Alaska Pollack (Theraga chalcogramma)Wrapped/canned upto 2.5

Kg

19

0303.67.90

Other Alaska Pollack (Theraga chalcogramma)

20

0303.89.90

Other fish, excluding livers and roes :Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

21

0303.91.90

Livers, roes and milt Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 kg

22

0305.32.90

Fish of

the

families

Bregmacerotidae,

Euclichthyidae, ..,

EXCL.Wrappe

23

0305.53.90

Fish of the families Bregmacerotidae, Euclichthyidae, Gadidae,

Macrou

24

0305.71.90

Other Shark fins

25

0305.72.10

Fish heads, tails and maws Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

26

0305.72.90

Other Fish heads, tails and maws

27

0305.79.90

Other edible fish offal :

28

0306.14.00

Frozen Crabs

29

0306.19.00

Frozen Crustaceans,Nes (Incl.Flours/Meals/Pellets)Fit For Human

Consu

30

0306.99.90

Other, including flours, meals and pellets of crustaceans, fit for hu

31

0307.11.10

Oysters, Live, fresh or chilled, Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

32

0307.11.90

Oysters, Live, fresh or chilled, EXCL. Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

33

0307.12.10

Oysters, Frozen, Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 kg

201

Sl.No.

HSCODE

DESCRIPTION

34

0307.12.90

Oysters, Frozen, Excl. Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 kg

35

0307.21.10

Scallops, Live, Fresh Or Chilled Wrapped/Canned Upto 2.5kg

36

0307.21.90

Scallops, Live, Fresh Or Chilled,Nes

37

0307.22.10

Scallops, including queen scallops, .. frozen Wrapped/canned upto

2.5

38

0307.29.90

OTHER LIVE, FRESH OR CHILLED, NES

39

0307.31.10

Mussels,Live,Fresh Or Chilled Wrapped/Canned upto 2.5kg

40

0307.31.90

Mussels, Live, Fresh Or Chilled,Nes

41

0307.39.90

OTHER

LIVE,FRESH

OR

CHILLED

MUSSELS(EXCL.MYTILUS SPP.,PERNA SPP.),NES

42

0307.49.90

OTH.CUTTLE

FISH(EXCL.SEPIA

OFFICINALIS,ROSSIA

MACROSOMA,SEPIOLA ..),N

43

0307.60.90

SNAILS, OTHER THAN SEA SNAILS,NES

44

0307.71.90

Live, fresh or chilled Clams, cockles and ark shells .., Solecurtid

45

0307.72.10

Clams, cockles and ark shells…, Donacidae, Hi, Frozen, Wrapped/c

46

0307.79.90

Other Clams, cockles and ark shells (families Arcidae, . and Veneri

47

0307.82.10

Live, fresh or chilled stromboid conchs (Strombus spp.)

48

0307.84.10

Frozen stromboid conchs (Strombus spp.) Wrapped/canned upto 2.5

kg

49

0307.91.90

Aquantic

Invert.(Excl.

Crustaceans),Live,Fresh

Or

Chilled,Nes(Excl.Wr

50

0307.99.10

OTH.,INCL.FLOURS,MEALS

AND

PELLETS

OF

AQUATIC.,NOT FRESH OR CHILLED,W

51

0307.99.90

OTH.,INCL.

FLOURS,

MEALS

AND

PELLETS

OF

AQUATIC..,NOT FRESH OR CHILLE

52

3703.10.00

PHOTOGRAPHIC PAPER, PAPERBOARD AND TEXTILES..,IN

ROLLS OF A WIDTH EXC

53

3703.90.00

OTHER PHOTOGRAPHIC PAPER..,(EXCL.IN ROLLS..,FOR

COLOUR PHOTOGRAPHY(PO

54

3706.10.90

Other Cinematograph Film, Exposed And Developed, Width

>=35mm

55

3706.90.90

Other Cinematograph Film, Exposed And Developed, Width <35mm

56

3806.20.00

Salts

Of

Resin/Res.Acids

Or

Of

Deriv'S

Rosin/Resin

Acids,Excl.Rosin A

57

4421.20.00

Statuettes and other ornaments : Coffins

58

7011.10.00

GLASS ENVELOPES (INCL.BULBS AND TUBES),OPEN AND

GLASS PARTS..,FOR ELE

59

8528.42.00

Capable of directly connecting to and designed for use with an

automa

60

8539.21.90

Other Tungsten Halogen Filament Lamps (Excl.Ultra-Violet Or

Infra-Red

61

8545.19.90

Carbon electrodes (excl. for furnaces), nes

62

8545.20.00

Carbon Brushes

202

Sl.No.

HSCODE

DESCRIPTION

63

8545.90.90

Articles Of Graphite Or Other Carbon, Nes, For Electrical Purposes,

N

64

8706.00.39

Chassis fitted with engines, …For vehicle of a cylinder capacity

>4000cc

65

8806.10.00

Unmanned aircraft: Designed for the carriage of passengers

66

8806.22.00

Oth,for rmt-ctrl.flight only: With maximum take-off weight>250g

but <

67

8806.23.00

Oth,for rmt-ctrl.flight only: With maximum take-off weight >7 kg

but

68

8806.24.00

Oth,for rmt-ctrl.flight only: With maximum take-off weight>25 kg

but

69

8806.29.00

Other, for remote-controlled flight only : OTHER

70

8806.92.00

OTHER: With maximum take-off weight>250g but <7 kg

71

8806.94.00

OTHER: With maximum take-off weight >7 kg but <150 kg

72

8806.99.00

OTHERS: NES

73

8901.10.10

Vessels capa. <=3000 DWT for regi. Bangladesh oper. in ocean at

least

74

8901.20.10

Vessels capa.=<3000 DWT for regi.in BD operating in ocean at least

3

75

8901.90.10

Vessels capa. <=3000 DWT for regi.in BD operating in ocean at least

3

76

8903.11.00

Fitted or dsgn. to be fitted with a motor,unladen (net) weight (ex. t

77

8903.12.00

Not designed for use with a motor and unladen (net) weight not

exceed

78

8903.19.00

Inflatable (including rigid hull inflatable) boats : OTHER

79

8903.21.00

Sailboats, oth than inflatable, with or without auxiliary motor, Of a

80

8903.22.00

Sailboats,oth than inflatable,with/without auxiliary motor:Of a lengt

81

8903.31.00

Motorboats, other than inflatable, not including outboard motorboats:

82

8903.32.00

Motorboats,oth than inflatable, not incl. outboard motorboats: Of a l

83

8903.93.00

Yachts and oth vessels for pleasure or sports; rowing boats canoes,O

84

8903.99.00

Other Vessels For Pleasure Or Sports, Nes; Rowing Boats And

Canoes

85

9201.10.00

Upright Pianos

86

9201.20.00

Grand Pianos

87

9201.90.00

Other Automatic Pianos, Harpsichords And Other Keyboard

Instruments,

88

9202.10.00

String Musical Instruments Played With A Bow

89

9202.90.00

Other String Musical Instruments, Nes

90

9205.10.00

Wind musical instruments, Brass-wind instruments

91

9205.90.00

Wind musical instruments, (EXCL. Brass-wind instruments)

92

9206.00.00

Percussion Musical Instruments (Eg Drums, Xylophones, Cymbals,

Etc)

203

Sl.No.

HSCODE

DESCRIPTION

93

9207.10.00

Keybrd.Instrmnts.With

Elec.Produced

Or

Amplified

Sound

Oth.Than Accor

94

9207.90.00

Oth.Musical

Instruments,Nes,With

Electrically

Produced Or

Amplified S

95

9208.10.00

Musical Boxes

96

9208.90.00

Fairground Organs, Etc; Decoy Calls Of All Kinds; Whistles, Etc

97

9209.30.00

Musical Instrument Strings

98

9209.91.00

Parts And Accessories For Pianos

99

9209.92.00

Parts And Accessories For The Musical Instruments Of 92.02

100

9209.94.00

Parts And Accessories For The Musical Instruments Of 92.07

101

9209.99.00

Parts And Accessories Of Other Musical Instruments, Nes

102

9701.10.00

Paintings, Drawings And Pastels Executed Enti

103

9701.21.00

Of an age exceeding 100 years : Painting, drawings and pastels

104

9701.29.00

Of an age exceeding 100 years : OTHER

105

9701.90.00

Collages And Similar Decorative Plaques, Exec

106

9701.91.00

Painting, drawings and pastels

107

9701.99.00

Other,nes

108

9702.10.00

Original engravings, prints & lithographs… Of an age exceeding 100

109

9702.90.00

Original engravings, prints and lithographs, NES

110

9703.00.00

Original Sculptures And Statuary, In Any Mate

111

9703.10.00

Original sculptures and statuary, in an material, Of an age exceeding

112

9703.90.00

Original sculptures and statuary, in an material, NES

113

9704.00.00

Postage Or Revenue Stamps…, First-Day Covers, Etc

Table-1(d): Proposal to Impose VAT at the Import Stage

Heading

HS Code

Description of Goods

(1)

(2)

(3)

07.09

0709.99.90

Other: Sweet corn

07.12

0712.90.10

Other vegetables; mixtures of vegetables: Sweet corn

08.01

0801.31.90

Other Cashew nuts in shell

26.01

2601.11.00

Iron Ore

2601.12.00

2601.20.00

39.14

3914.00.00

Ion-exchangers based on polymers of 39.01 to 39.13, in

primary forms

39.16

3916.90.20

Fibre re-inforced polymer (FRP) sticks and profile shapes

39.17

3917.29.10

Other: hoses for gas cylinder

39.26

3926.90.92

Composite LPG Gas Cylinder

40.11

4011.70.10

Tyre used on agricultural tractors

204

Heading

HS Code

Description of Goods

(1)

(2)

(3)

40.13

4013.90.10

Inner tubes or rubber used on tractors

40.16

4016.99.20

Rubber bearing

47.03

4703.29.00

Wood

pulp

(applicable

only

to

VAT

registered

manufacturers of thermosetting molding compounds)

70.19

7019.90.20

Composite LPG Gas Cylinder

71.02

7102.21.00

Unworked or simply sawn, cleaved or bruted.

85.17

8517.62.40

Grandmaster clock; modulator; multiplexer; optical fibre

platform

85.27

8527.12.00

Two-in-one (in fully assembled condition) [applicable only

for imports under the existing Non-Tourist Passenger

Baggage Rules, 2024

86.09

8609.00.10

Insulated or refer container

8609.00.90

Other container

Table-2: Proposed Changes to the Notification on Minimum Value

Withdrawal of Minimum Value :

Heading

HS Code

Description of Goods

(1)

(2)

(3)

22.02

2202.91.00

Non-alcoholic beer

2202.99.00

Energy drink

Other than energy drink

27.10

2710.19.41

Heavy normal paraffin

2710.19.49

2710.19.51

Liquid paraffin in drum

2710.19.59

2710.19.61

Other paraffin

54.07

59.03

All H.S.

Code

Polyester interlining/ interlining

63.04

All H.S.

Code

Other furnishing articles, excluding those of heading 94.04.

Mosquito Net

70.06

7006.00.00

Glass Of 70.03, 70.04 Or 70.05, Bent, Edge-Worked, Engraved,

Etc.

72.24

All H.S.

Code

Other alloy steel in ingots or other primary forms; semi-finished

products of other alloy steel

76.04

All H.S.

Code

Aluminum bars, rods & profiles

84.14

8414.30.90

Compressors of a kind used in refrigerator :

without Inverter

with Inverter PCB

205

Heading

HS Code

Description of Goods

(1)

(2)

(3)

8414.80.49

Compressors of a kind used in Air Conditioner :

without Inverter

with Inverter PCB

85.06

8506.10.00

Dry cell Battery:

D size (non-alkaline)

C size (non-alkaline)

AA size (non-alkaline)

AAA size (non-alkaline)

AA size (alkaline)

AAA size (alkaline)

Other size (alkaline)

8506.50.00

Lithium battery

8506.60.10

Air-Zinc battery

8506.60.90

85.16

8516.31.00

Hair dryers

8516.32.00

Other hair dressing apparels:

8516.40.90

Electric Smoothing irons (other)

8516.71.00

Coffee or tea maker

8516.72.00

Toasters

85.17

8517.13.00

Smart Phones

1. Display up to 4.5''

up to [8GB ROM + 1GB RAM]

above [8GB ROM +1GB RAM]

2. Display above 4.5"

up to [8GB ROM + 1GB RAM]

above [8GB ROM +1GB RAM]

8517.14.00

Cellular (Mobile/Fixed Wireless) Telephone Set Excl. Smart

Phone

87.12

All H.S.

Code

Bicycle/bicycle parts:

87.15

Steel

Alloy

206

Reduction of Minimum Value:

Heading

HS Code

Description of Goods

Unit

Existing

Minimum

Value

USD/Unit

Proposed

Minimum

Value

USD/Unit

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

33.04

3304.10.00

Lipstick

kg

40.00

30.00

3304.99.10

Face and/or skin cream

kg

20.00

14.00

3304.99.20

Moisture lotion

kg

10.00

7.00

3304.99.90

Facewash

kg

10.00

7.00

34.01

3401.19.00

3401.20.00

3401.30.00

Facewash

kg

10.00

7.00

8301.40.90

Door locks

kg

5.00

4.00

Rationalization of Minimum Value:

Heading

HS Code

Description of Goods

Unit

Existing

Minimum

Value

USD/Unit

Proposed

Minimum

Value

USD/Unit

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

04.09

0409.00.10

Natural

honey:

Wrapped/Canned up to 2.5kg

kg

5.00

7.00

0409.00.90

Natural honey: Other

kg

3.00

5.00

08.02

0802.80.10

Areca nuts:

0802.80.90

Fresh Green:

Whole

kg

1.25

1.50

Split

kg

1.50

1.75

Areca nuts Dried:

Split

kg

2.00

2.25

0802.99.11

Betel nuts:

0802.99.19

Fresh Green:

Whole

kg

1.25

1.50

Split

kg

1.50

1.75

Betel nuts Dried:

Split

kg

2.00

2.25

0802.99.12

Semi processed betel nuts

kg

2.00

2.25

207

Heading

HS Code

Description of Goods

Unit

Existing

Minimum

Value

USD/Unit

Proposed

Minimum

Value

USD/Unit

17.04

1704.10.10

1704.10.90

1704.90.10

1704.90.90

Sugar

confectionery

(including white chocolate)

not containing cocoa

kg

3.00

4.00

19.04

All H.S.

Codes

Prepared foods

kg

2.50

3.00

21.01

All H.S.

Codes

Coffee imported in retail

pack

kg

7.00

10.00

25.17

2517.10.90

Pakur Stone Chips

Imported by Railway

MT

11.50

13.50

Imported by Road

MT

13.00

15.00

33.04

3304.10.00

Lip liner, Lip gloss, Lip gel

and like products

kg

20.00

30.00

33.07

3307.10.00

Foam

kg

3.00

4.00

52.08

All H.S.

Code

(Excluding

5208.52.00,

5208.59.00)

Cotton/ Shirting fabrics

kg

3.00

4.00

54.07

All H.S.

Panting fabrics

kg

4.00

5.00

Code

Shirting fabrics

kg

3.75

4.50

55.16

All H.S.

Code

Rayon fabrics

kg

3.00

4.00

58.01

All H.S.

Code

Chenille/curtain fabrics

kg

4.25

5.00

58.04

All H.S.

Code

Net fabrics

kg

3.00

4.00

59.03

All H.S.

Code

Woven fabrics coated with

plastic/PVC coated textile

fabrics

kg

2.00

2.25

PVC canvas fabrics

kg

2.00

2.25

60.01

All H.S.

Code

Upholstery velvet fabrics

kg

4.25

5.00

60.05

All

H.S.

Code

Knit fabrics

kg

3.00

4.00

68.05

Natural or artificial abrasive

powder or grain:

6805.10.00

On a base of woven textile

fabric only

kg

3.00

6.00

208

Heading

HS Code

Description of Goods

Unit

Existing

Minimum

Value

USD/Unit

Proposed

Minimum

Value

USD/Unit

6805.20.00

On a base of paper or

paperboard only

kg

3.00

6.00

6805.30.00

On a base of other materials

kg

3.00

6.00

69.07

All HS

Code

Ceramic Tiles :

1000 mm X 1000 mm

m2

10.00

12.00

1200 mm X 600 mm

800 mm X 800 mm

m2

6.00

8.00

900 mm X 150 mm

600 mm X 600 mm

600 mm X 300 mm

m2

5.75

7.00

500 mm X 333 mm

450 mm X 300 mm

m2

4.75

6.0

330 mm X 330 mm

300 mm X 300 mm

400 mm X 200 mm

200 mm X 200 mm

1000 mm X 1000 mm এর ঊর্ধ্বে

m2

11.00

13.00

69.10

6910.10.00

Sanitary ware:

6910.90.00

Wash basin

u

20.00

25.00

Other

sanitary

ware

(including water closet pans)

u

30.00

35.00

73.18

All H.S.

Code

Coach screws, all wood

screws, Screws hooks &

rings, Tapping screws and

other similar products

kg

2.00

2.50

83.01

8301.10.00

Padlocks

kg

3.00

3.25

84.15

8415.90.90

Parts of air-conditioner

kg

3.00

4.00

However, in determining the value of air-conditioner parts, if the

internationally recognized price information sources (such as

LME) provide the prices of the primary raw materials or

components used in manufacturing those parts, then such price

information must be collected and used to determine the

assessable customs value

8516.50.00

Microwave ovens

u

2.00/L

2.50/L

85.32

All H.S.

Code

Electrical capacitors, fixed

variable or adjustable (pre-

set).

kg

4.00

5.00

209

Heading

HS Code

Description of Goods

Unit

Existing

Minimum

Value

USD/Unit

Proposed

Minimum

Value

USD/Unit

87.14

All H.S.

Code

Bicycle/bicycle parts

kg

2.00

3.00

94.01

All H.S.

Code

Seat

(Visitor

chair,

revolving

chair)

kg

3.00

3.50

95.03

9503.00.90

Other (toys):

Friction type

kg

6.00

7.50

Battery operated

kg

6.50

9.50

Remote

control

battery

operated

kg

7.50

11.00

Remote control rechargeable

battery operated

kg

10.00

13.00

New Imposition of Minimum Value:

HS Code

Description of Goods

Unit

Minimum

Value

USD /Unit

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0801.32.90

Cashew Nuts

kg

7.00

3403.99.20

3403.99.30

Semi-synthetic Lubricating Oil

Synthetic Lubricating Oil

kg

kg

30% in

addition of

ICIS Value

Heading 52.08

Shirting fabrics

kg

4.00

Heading 54.07

Suiting fabrics

kg

5.00

Products for Which HS Codes Have Been Changed:

Heading

Exixting HS

Code

Ammended HS

Code

Description of Goods

83.02

All H.S. Codes

8302.10.00

Hinges

210

List of Products for Which Descriptions Have Been Amended:

HS Code

Existing Description of Goods

Proposed Description of Goods

(1)

(2)

(3)

1901.90.90

Other, (For example: Ovaltine,

Horlicks, Complan & products of

similar

commercial

name)

(excluding Malt Extract, Whipping

Cream, Tempura Flour & Similar

Products)

Other, put up for retail sale (For

example:

Ovaltine,

Horlicks,

Complan & products of similar

commercial name) (excluding Malt

Extract, Whipping Cream, Tempura

Flour & Similar Products)

Table-3(a): List of Proposed Concessionary Items for Solar Plant

Installation

TABLE-1

Heading

H. S. Code

Description

(1)

(2)

(3)

85.04

8504.40.90

Solar Inverter

85.07

8507.90.90

Battery Pack Housing

85.07

8507.60.00

Lithium Cell, lithium ion battery

85.41

8541.43.00

Solar Photovoltaic

Module/panel

TABLE-2

Heading

H. S. Code

Description

(1)

(2)

(3)

73.08

7308.90.99

Mounting Structure (Steel)

76.10

7610.90.90

Mounting Structure (Aluminum)

85.07

8507.60.00

Lithium Cell, lithium ion battery, lithium ion battery

pack, Battery Energy Storage System (BESS)

85.37

8537.10.90

8537.20.00

Battery Management System

85.37

8537.10.90

8537.20.00

SCADA/Plant Monitoring or Control System

85.44

8544.42.00

8544.49.00

8544.60.00

UV Protected Solar DC Cable

90.32

9032.89.00

Battery Thermal Management System

211

Table-3(b): Proposed Concessionary Items for the Semiconductor

Industry

H. S. Code

Description

(1)

(2)

3818.00.00

Wafers

3907.30.00

Epoxy moulding compunds (EMC)

3909.40.00

Phenolic moulding compounds

8419.89.90

Thermal shock chambers

8473.30.00

Hardware emulation platforms / FPGA prototyping chassis for

SoC validation

8473.30.00

Data Center Grade FPGA Boards

8479.89.00

Automation units / handlers / robotic accessories used in test

setups

8486.40.00

Die bonders / Die attach machines

8486.40.00

Wire bonders (ball/wedge)

8486.40.00

Flip-chip bonders

8486.40.00

Wafer dicing saw

8486.40.00

Wafer probers

8486.40.00

Trim & form machines

8486.40.00

Wave solder machines

8486.40.00

Selective soldering machines

8486.90.00

Parts & accessories for the machines and apprratus of a kind used

solely or principally for the manufacture of semiconductor boles

or wafers, semiconductor devices, electronic integrated circuits

8514.19.00

Industrial reflow ovens

8514.39.00

Burn-in ovens

8514.90.00

Parts for industrial ovens

8515.11.00

Electric soldering irons/stations

8515.90.00

Parts for soldering equipment

8523.49.90

Other FPGA Development Tools (Software)

8523.80.20

Test executive software (ATE software)

8523.80.90

CAD/CAE Software

8523.80.90

EDA Software (Cadence, Synopsys, Siemens, Ansys, AMC)

8523.80.90

Engineering Simulation Software (TCAD, EM Solver)

8523.80.90

Digital IP cores (DDR, PCIe, USB)

8523.80.90

Analog IP (PLL, ADC, DAC)

8523.80.90

RF IP (LNA, PA, Mixer)

8523.80.90

Power IP (PMIC, LDO, DC-DC)

8534.00.00

Printed Circuit Board (PCB)

8542.39.90

Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC) ICs

212

H. S. Code

Description

(1)

(2)

8542.39.90

Digital-to-Analog Converter (DAC) ICs

8542.39.90

Power management ICs (PMIC), voltage regulators and power

controllers

8542.39.90

High-speed SerDes PHY / interface ICs and mixed-signal high-

speed ICs

8542.39.90

RF and mixed-signal integrated circuits (LNAs, mixers, PLLs,

etc.)

8542.39.90

Photonics integrated circuits / optical semiconductor chips

(prototype category)

8543.70.90

Development Kits & Evaluation Boards

9027.50.00

High-Resolution Thermal Imaging Camera

9030.20.00

High-Speed Oscilloscope (33+ GHz)

9030.20.00

Oscilloscopes

9030.33.00

Instruments for bench measurements

9030.82.00

Semiconductor wafer/device measurement instruments (IC

electrical test/ parameter measurement)

9030.82.00

EM Probing Station

9030.89.00

Signal analyzers, spectrum analyzers, protocol analyzers and

other electronic measuring

9030.89.00

Vector Network Analyzer

9031.20.00

Test benches / automated test benches / ATE bench-type systems

9031.41.00

Solder Paste Inspection (SPI) Machine

9031.41.00

Automated Optical Inspection (AOI) Machine

9031.80.00

ATE accessories, measurement fixtures, device handlers and

supporting test equipment

9403.20.00

Electrostatic Discharge Workbench

Table-3(c): Proposed Concessionary Raw Materials for Manufacturing

Smart Cards and Bank Cards

H.S. Code

Description

3920.49.40

PVC Coated Overlay

3921.90.92

PVC Coated Magstrip

3215.19.90

Printing Ink

3215.90.90

Printing Ink

4911.91.00

Picture Design foil

213

H.S. Code

Description

3919.90.30

Hologram

3212.10.00

Stamping Foil

3921.19.90

Conductive Tape

3921.90.99

Insulating Plate

4008.21.00

Rubber Blanket

Table-3(d): Inclusion of New Items in the Concessionary Notification for

the Production of Bio-Hygiene Machineries

HS Code

Description

3920.99.90

PE Protective Film /Protection Foil/Protective Film

7219.11.00

Hot-Rolled Stainless Steel, In Coils, >=600mm By >10mm

7219.12.00

Hot-Rolled Stainless Steel, In Coils, >=600mm By 4.75-10mm

7219.13.00

Hot-Rolled Stainless Steel, In Coils, >=600mm By 3-4.75mm

3802.10.00

Activated carbon

7222.19.00

Bars and rods, not further worked than hot-rolled, hot-drawn or

extruded-Stainless Steel Bar/Rod-Stainless Steel Bar/Rod (Non-

Circular)

3917.39.90

Flexible Hose pipe

7304.39.00

Seamless Stainless Steel, Circular cross section; Tubes/Pipes

8536.50.00

Other Switches, Level Switch, Flow Switch, Instrument Air Pressure

Switch, Pressure Switch

7304.59.00

Mounting Rail

7326.90.90

Clamp Assembly

8302.20.00

SS Castor Wheel/ Castor Wheel

7219.90.00

Cold-Rolled Stainless Steel Coil, SS Sheet

7020.00.90

Borosilicate Sight Glass (With or Without Bracket)

Table-4: Proposed List for Reduction of Regulatory Duty (RD) on Spices

HS Code

Description

0904.11.90

Pepper, Neither Crushed Nor Ground, Nes

0904.12.00

Pepper, Crushed Or Ground

0904.21.10

Fruits of the genus Capsicum …,: Dried or neither crushed or ground

0904.22.10

Fruits of the genus Capsicum …,: crushed or ground,

Wrapped/canned

214

0904.22.90

Fruits of the genus Capsicum…,: crushed or ground, EXCL.

Wrapped/ca

0905.10.10

Vanilla, Neither crushed or ground, Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

0905.10.90

Vanilla, Neither crushed or ground, EXCL. Wrapped/canned upto

2.5 Kg

0905.20.10

Vanilla, crushed or ground, Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

0905.20.90

Vanilla, crushed or ground, EXCL. Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

0906.11.10

Neither crushed nor ground:Cinnamon (Cinnamomum zeylanicum

Blume), W

0906.11.90

Neither crushed nor ground:Cinnamon (Cinnamo. Zeylan. Blume),

Excl. W

0906.20.00

Cinnamon And Cinnamon-Tree Flowers, Crushed Or Ground

0907.10.10

Cloves (whole fruit, cloves and stems), Neither Crushed or ground,

Wr

0907.10.90

Cloves (whole fruit, cloves and stems), Neither Crushed or ground,

EX

0907.20.10

Cloves (whole fruit, cloves and stems), Crushed or ground,

Wrapped/ca

0907.20.90

Cloves (whole fruit, cloves and stems), Crushed or ground, EXCL.

Wrap

0908.11.10

Nutmeg :Neither Crushed or ground, Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

0908.11.90

Nutmeg :Neither Crushed or ground, EXCL. Wrapped/canned upto

2.5 Kg

0908.12.90

Nutmeg : Crushed or ground, EXCL. Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

0908.21.10

Mace : Neither Crushed or ground, Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

0908.21.90

Mace : Neither Crushed or ground, EXCL. Wrapped/canned upto

2.5 Kg

0908.22.90

Mace : Crushed or ground, EXCL. Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

0908.31.10

Cardamoms :Neither Crushed or ground. Wrapped/canned upto 2.5

Kg

0908.31.90

Cardamoms :Neither Crushed or ground. EXCL. Wrapped/canned

upto 2.5 K

0908.32.10

Cardamoms : Crushed or ground. Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

0908.32.90

Cardamoms : Crushed or ground. EXCL. Wrapped/canned upto 2.5

Kg

0909.21.10

Seeds of coriander : Neither crushed or ground Wrapped/canned upto 2.

0909.21.90

Seeds of coriander : Neither crushed or ground EXCL.

Wrapped/canned u

215

0909.22.10

Seeds of coriander : Crushed or ground Wrapped/canned upto 2.5

Kg

0909.22.90

Seeds of coriander : Crushed or ground EXCL. Wrapped/canned

upto 2.5

0909.31.10

Seeds of Cumin : Neither crushed or ground Wrapped/canned upto

2.5 Kg

0909.31.90

Seeds of Cumin : Neither crushed or ground EXCL.

Wrapped/canned upto

0909.32.10

Seeds of Cumin : Crushed or ground Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

0909.32.90

Seeds of Cumin : Crushed or ground EXCL. Wrapped/canned upto

2.5 Kg

0909.61.10

Seeds of anise, badian, caraway or fennel; juniper berries : Neither

0909.61.90

Seeds of anise, badian, caraway…; juniper berries : Neither crushed

0909.62.10

Seeds of anise, badian, caraway or fennel; juniper berries : Crushed

0909.62.90

Seeds of anise, badian, caraway…; juniper berries : Crushed or grou

0910.12.10

Ginger : Crushed or ground Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

0910.12.90

Ginger : Crushed or ground EXCL. Wrapped/canned upto 2.5 Kg

0910.20.10

Saffron, Wrapped/Canned upto 2.5 kg

0910.20.90

Saffron, Nes

0910.91.10

MIXTURES REFFERED TO IN NOTE 1(B) TO THIS CHAP

WRAP/CAN UPTO 2.5 KG

0910.91.90

Other

0910.99.10

Other Spices, Nes, Wrapped/Canned upto 2.5 kg

0910.99.90

Other Spices, Nes, (Excl. Wrapped/Canned upto 2.5 kg)

Table-5(a): Proposed Concessionary Raw Materials for Pesticide

Production

Heading

H.S.code

Description

(1)

(2)

(3)

15.15

1515.30.00

Castor oil polyglycolether

25.07

2507.00.90

Kaolin

25.18

2518.10.00

Dolomite (granular/powder)

27.10

2710.19.92

White mineral oil

2710.19.99

Spindel oil

27.15

2715.00.00

Emulsifier SS62

28.11

2811.22.00

Silica

28.36

2836.99.90

Magnesium Carbonate

216

Heading

H.S.code

Description

(1)

(2)

(3)

2836.99.90

Sodium Carbonate

28.43

2843.90.90

Antimousse 454 (Rhodacol-70)

29.02

2902.44.00

Xylene

29.03

2903.99.00

2,6-di-t-butyl-4-methyl-phenol

29.06

2906.29.00

Phenylo sulfonate CLX

29.14

2914.11.00

Acetone

2914.22.00

Cyclohexanon

29.15

2915.90.00

But-2enedioic acid

29.30

2930.90.99

AASCA-60 (Rhodacol-70)

29.33

2933.99.00

Soprophor S/25

29.34

2934.20.00

1,2-benzisothiazol-3(2H)-one

2934.20.00

Oleylyethoxy ethanol

34.02

3402.39.90

Calcium dodecylphenyl sulfonate

3402.39.90

Sodium dodecy benzene sulfonate

3402.42.90

Berol, 924, 942, 943, 944, 947 & 948

3402.42.90

Oleyl alcohol ethoxylate

3402.42.90

Ricinus oil polyglycolether

3402.42.90

Synperonic OP 10

38.12

3812.20.00

Epoxidized soybean oil

38.24

3824.99.99

Adjuvant

3824.99.99

Napthalene sulfonic acid

3824.99.99

Reoplast 39

3824.99.99

Sodium lignosulphonate

3824.99.99

Sorpol (Emulsifier)

39.01

3901.10.00

Polyethylene Granules

39.02

3902.90.00

Blockcopolymer PO/PE

39.10

3910.00.00

Polydimethylsiloxane

39.13

3913.90.00

Linear polysaccharid

Table-5(b): Import Concessions for Poultry/Dairy/Fish Feed

Manufacturing Enterprises

(a) Change of Descriptions:

H.S.code

Existing Description

Ammended Description

3003.10.00

3003.20.00

3003.39.90

Veterinary

and

fishery

medicament for retail sale

Veterinary

and

fishery

medicament not for retail sale

217

3003.90.99

Veterinary medicine: FMD

Vaccine, Bio-add, Til-gain,

Origo-stim

Other

Medicaments

for

poultry/dairy/fisheries, not for

retail sale

3004.90.99

Veterinary medicine: FMD

Vaccine, Bio-add, Til-gain,

Origo-stim / Spermfilter

Other

Medicaments

for

poultry/dairy/fisheries,

for

retail sale

(b) Newly Included HS Codes:

H.S.code

Description

2833.21.00

Magnesium Sulphate (Feed grade)

2827.39.00

Potassium Chloride (Feed grade)

2519.90.00

Mgnesium Oxide (Feed grade)

Table-6(a): Inclusion of New Raw Materials in the Concessionary Notification

for the Production of Anti-Cancer Medicines

SL No.

H.S. Code

Description

1

3002.90.00

Etancercept

2

2937.90.00

Erythropoietin

3

3004.90.91

Darbepoetin

4

3002.90.10

Tenecteplase

5

3002.90.10

Peg-Interferon

6

3004.90.99

Aflibercept

7

3002.90.00

Datopotamab Deruxtecan

8

3004.90.99

⁠Depemokimab

9

3004.90.99

Sotatercept

218

Table-6(b): Inclusion of New Raw Materials in the Concessionary

Notification for the Production of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients

(API)

SL No.

H.S. Code

Description

1.

29335990

3-methyl-7-(2-butyn-l-yl)-8-bromoxanthine;

2.

29335990

8-Bromo-7-(but-2-yn-1-yl)-3-methyl-1H-purine-2,6(3H,7H)-

dione;

3.

29335990

8-Bromo-3-Methyl-7-But-2-Ynyl Xanthine;

4.

29339900

tert-butyl (5-tosyl-5H-pyrrolo[2,3-b]pyrazin-2-yl)carbamate

5.

29339900

1-Pyrrolidinecarboxylic

acid,3-(2-bromoacetyl)-4

-ethyl-,

phenylmethyl ester, (3R,4S)

6.

29339900

(3R,4S)-BENZYL

3-(2-BROMOACETYL)-4-

ETHYLPYRROLIDINE-1-CARBOXYLATE;

7.

29339900

5-Difluoromethoxy-2-Mercapto Benzimidazole

8.

29339900

2-(Chloromethyl)-3,4-Dimethoxypyridine Hydrochloride

9.

29339900

2[[[4-MethoxyPropoxy)-3-Methyl-2-Pyridinyl] Methyl]-Thio]-1-

H-Benzimidazole

10.

29339900

4,6-dichloro-2-propylthiopyrimidine-5-amine;

11.

29339900

2-((3aR,4S,6R,6aS)-6-amino-2,2-dimethyltetrahydro-3aH-

cyclopenta[d]

12.

29339900

4,7 DICHLOROQUINOLINE

13.

29339900

HYDROXYNOVALDIAMINE

14.

29339900

Imatinib Base

15.

29339900

4-((4-Methylpiperazin-1-yl)methyl)benzoic acid dihydrochloride;

16.

29339900

7H-Pyrrolo[2.3-d]pyrimidin-4-amine,N-methyl-N-[(3R,4R)-4-

methyl-3-piperidinyl]

17.

29339900

Acetoxy Empagliflozin

18.

29335990

N1-(2-(Dimethylamino) Ethyl)-5-Methoxy-N1-Methyl-N4-(4-(1-

Methyl-1H-Indol-3-Yl)Pyrimidin-2-Yl)Benzene-1,2,4-Triamine;

19.

29335990

TERT-BUTYL-2-((4R,6S) -6-(E))-2-(4(-4- FLUOROPHENYL)-

6-

ISOPROPYL-2-(N-METHYL

(METHYL

SULFONYL)

AMINO) PYRIMIDIN-5-YL) VINYL)-2,2-DIMETHYL- 1,3-

DIOXANE-4-YL) ACETATE;

20.

29335990

6-[1E-2}-[4-(4-fluorophenyl)-6-isopropyl-2-

[methyl(methylsulfonyl)amino]-5-pyrimidine]vinyl

]-2,2-

dimethyl-1,3-dioxane-4-Tert-Butyl acetate;

21.

29335990

tert-Butyl

6-[(1E)-2-[4-(4-fluorophenyl)-6-(1-methylethyl)-2-

[methyl(methylsulfonyl)amino]-5-pyrimidinyl]ethenyl]-2,2-

dimethyl-1,3-dioxane-4-acetate;

22.

29339900

LOSARTAN BASE;

23.

29349990

Sacubitril Calcium;

24.

29241900

(R)-(-)-3-(Carbamoylmethyl)-5-methylhexanoic acid;

219

SL No.

H.S. Code

Description

25.

29349990

Azithromycin Amine;

26.

29333990

4-Dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP)

27.

29372399

17a-Hydroxyprogesterone

28.

29239000

Montelukast Cyclohexylamine Salt

29.

29334900

Montelukast alcohol

30.

29339900

6-(4-amino-2,6-dichlorophenoxy)-4-isopropylpyridazin-3(2H)-

one

31.

29269090

N-Cyanoacetylurethane

32.

29359000

Tert-Butyl6-[(1E)-2-[4-(4-fluorophenyl)-6-(1-methylethyl)-2-

[methyl(methylsulfonyl)amino]-5-pyrimidinyl]ethenyl]-2,2-

dimethyl-1,3-dioxane-4-acetate

33.

29379000

Canrenone

34.

29339900

(1S,6S)-2,8-Diazabicyclo[4.3.0]nonane

35.

29349990

MXF-1

36.

29415010

Erythromycin thiocyanate

37.

29109000

RLZ-2

38.

29242900

RLZ-3

39.

29335990

Piperazine

40.

29333990

BLT-1

41.

29349990

BLT-2

42.

29349990

BLT-3

43.

29309099

N,N'-Bis (acryloyl) cystamine

44.

29333990

Fexofenadine base

45.

29333200

Rabeprazole Sulphide

46.

29339900

N-[5-[(4-methylphenyl)sulfonyl] PPDE

47.

29339900

1-Pyrrolidinecarboxylic acid BEPE

48.

29269020

ACETONITRILE

49.

29152400

Trifluoroacetic anhydride

50.

29329900

1,4-DIOXANE

51.

29321100

TETRAHYDROFURAN

220

Table-6(c): Inclusion of New Active Ingredients in the Concessionary

Notification for the Pharmaceutical Industry

Table-1

Table-2

Sl

H.S. Code

Description

1

3205.00.00

Colour Lakes (Opadry, wincoat, readycost, D&C

yellow, Nyomix, Instacoat Aqua)

2

1516.20.00

Hard fat suppository base

Sl

H.S. Code

Description of Goods

(1)

(2)

(3)

1

2106.90.60

Zeaxanthin 5% Beadlets

2

2835.26.00

Calcium Phosphate BP

3

2905.22.00

Propylene Glycol BP/USP

4

2914.62.00

Coenzyme Q10(Ubidecarenone INN), Ubidecarenone 20%

Pellets, Ubidecarenone 46% Pellets

5

2932.99.00

Ferric Maltol INN

6

2933.99.00

Suzetrigine

7

2934.99.00

Dapagliflozin Propanediol

8

2934.99.90

Amenamevir

9

2934.99.90

Itraconazole SUBA

10

2937.23.99

Hydroxyprogesterone caproate

11

2941.00.90

Ivermectin

12

2942.00.90

Docetaxel

13

3004.90.91

Darbepoetin

14

3824.99.99

Eudragit

15

3905.99.00

Crospovidone USP

221

Table-7: Concessions against Following Assistive Devices

Heading

H. S. Code

Description

(1)

(2)

(3)

48.23

4823.90.99

Braille paper

49.11

4911.99.90

Picture exchange communication system (PECS)

66.02

6602.00.00

Walking sticks / canes

66.02

6602.00.00

Walking equipment for blind people

84.43

8443.32.90

Braille Printers

84.71

8471.30.00

Braille Notetaker

84.71

8471.60.90

Braille keyboards

84.71

8471.60.90

Refreshable braille Display

84.72

8472.90.90

Braille typewriters

85.23

8523.49.29

Screen reader software

85.23

8523.49.29

Braille translation software

85.31

8531.80.00

Personal emergency allert system

85.43

8543.70.90

Electronic Reading Devices Designed for use by the

Blind or Persons with Very Poor Eyesight.

90.21

9021.90.90

Assistive Ultrasonic Glasses

90.21

9021.90.90

Ultrasonic Walking Stick / Smart Cane

90.21

9021.90.90

Electrolarynx

90.21

9021.90.90

Ultrasonic Navigation Aid

90.21

9021.90.90

Cochlear implants (implantable)

90.21

9021.90.90

Speech generating device (SGD)

91.01

9101.11.10;

9101.19.10;

9101.21.10;

9101.29.10;

9101.91.10;

9101.99.10

Watches specially designed for the use of the blind

96.10

9610.00.90

Braille slate and stylus

222

Table-8(a): Duty Structure of Electric Vehicles under HS Heading 87.03

H.S. Code

Description

CD

RD

SD

VAT

AT

AIT

Total

Tax

Incidence

(TTI)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

- Other vehicles, with

only electric motor for

propulsion

---

Value

not

exceeding USD 25000

8703.80.11

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU

25

5

0

15

7.5

5

64.25

8703.80.12

---- Motor vehicles,

CKD

15

5

0

15

7.5

5

52.00

--- Value exceeding

USD 25000 but not

exceeding USD 50000

8703.80.21

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU

25

5

10

15

7.5

5

80.175

8703.80.22

---- Motor vehicles,

CKD

25

5

0

15

7.5

5

64.25

--- Value exceeding

USD 50000 but not

exceeding

USD

100000

8703.80.31

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU

25

5

45

15

7.5

5

135.91

8703.80.32

---- Motor vehicles,

CKD

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

--- Value exceeding

USD 100000 but not

exceeding

USD

200000

223

H.S. Code

Description

CD

RD

SD

VAT

AT

AIT

Total

Tax

Incidence

(TTI)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

8703.80.41

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU

25

5

60

15

7.5

5

159.80

8703.80.42

---- Motor vehicles,

CKD

25

5

45

15

7.5

5

135.91

--- Value exceeding

USD 200000

5

8703.80.51

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU

25

5

100

15

7.5

5

223.50

8703.80.52

---- Motor vehicles,

CKD

25

5

60

15

7.5

5

159.80

--- Other

8703.80.91

---- Ambulance fitted

with

essential

equipments passenger

cabin

length

exceeding 9ft

5

0

0

15

7.5

5

33.62

8703.80.99

---- Other

25

5

100

15

7.5

5

223.50

Table-8(b): Duty and Tax Rates for Petrol/Octane and Diesel-Driven Plug-in

Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEV) with Engine Capacity up to 2000 cc under

Heading 87.03

H.S. Code

Description

CD

RD

SD

VAT

AT

AIT

Total

Tax

Incidence

(TTI)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

- Other vehicles, with both spark-ignition internal combustion piston engine

and electric motor as motors for propulsion, capable of being charged by

plugging to external source of electric power :

---

Of

a

cylinder

capacity not exceeding

1800 cc :

224

H.S. Code

Description

CD

RD

SD

VAT

AT

AIT

Total

Tax

Incidence

(TTI)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

8703.60.11

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU, brand

new

25

0

10

15

7.5

5

73.44

8703.60.12

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons,

CBU,

reconditioned

25

5

10

15

7.5

5

80.175

---

Of

a

cylinder

capacity

exceeding

1800

cc

but

not

exceeding 2000 cc :

8703.60.21

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU, brand

new

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

8703.60.22

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons,

CBU,

reconditioned

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

8703.60.23

---- Microbus, brand

new

25

5

10

15

7.5

5

80.175

8703.60.24

----

Microbus,

reconditioned

25

5

10

15

7.5

5

80.175

- Other vehicles, with both compression-ignition internal combustion piston

engine (diesel or semi-diesel) and electric motor as motors for propulsion,

capable of being charged by plugging to external source of electric power :

---

Of

a

cylinder

capacity not exceeding

1800 cc :

8703.70.11

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU, brand

new

25

0

10

15

7.5

5

73.44

225

H.S. Code

Description

CD

RD

SD

VAT

AT

AIT

Total

Tax

Incidence

(TTI)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

8703.70.12

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons,

CBU,

reconditioned

25

5

10

15

7.5

5

80.175

---

Of

a

cylinder

capacity

exceeding

1800

cc

but

not

exceeding 2000 cc :

8703.70.21

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU, brand

new

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

8703.70.22

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons,

CBU,

reconditioned

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

8703.70.23

---- Microbus, brand

new

25

5

10

15

7.5

5

80.175

8703.70.24

----

Microbus,

reconditioned

25

5

10

15

7.5

5

80.175

Table-8(c): Restructuring Duty for ICE Motor Vehicles

H.S. Code

Description

CD

RD

SD

VAT

AT

AIT

Total

Tax

Incidence

(TTI)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

---

Reconditioned

vehicles

exceeding

1000

cc

but

not

exceeding 1200 cc :

8703.22.11

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

25

5

45

15

7.5

5

135.91

226

H.S. Code

Description

CD

RD

SD

VAT

AT

AIT

Total

Tax

Incidence

(TTI)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

including

station

wagons, CBU

8703.22.12

---- Ambulance fitted

with

essential

equipment

having

passenger cabin length

exceeding 9 feet

5

0

0

15

7.5

5

33.63

8703.22.13

---- Microbus, CBU

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

---

Other

vehicles

exceeding 1000 cc but

not exceeding 1200 cc

:

8703.22.21

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU

25

5

45

15

7.5

5

135.91

8703.22.22

---- Motor cars, CKD

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

8703.22.23

---- Other vehicles,

CKD

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

8703.22.24

---- Ambulance fitted

with

essential

equipment

having

passenger cabin length

exceeding 9 feet

5

0

0

15

7.5

5

33.63

8703.22.25

---- Microbus, CBU

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

---

Reconditioned

vehicles

exceeding

1200

cc

but

not

exceeding 1500 cc :

8703.22.31

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU

25

5

60

15

7.5

5

159.80

8703.22.32

---- Ambulance fitted

with

essential

equipment

having

passenger cabin length

exceeding 9 feet

5

0

0

15

7.5

5

33.63

8703.22.33

---- Microbus, CBU

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

227

H.S. Code

Description

CD

RD

SD

VAT

AT

AIT

Total

Tax

Incidence

(TTI)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

---

Other

vehicles

exceeding 1200 cc but

not exceeding 1500 cc

:

8703.22.41

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU

25

5

60

15

7.5

5

159.80

8703.22.42

---- Motor cars, CKD

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

8703.22.43

---- Other vehicles,

CKD

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

8703.22.44

---- Ambulance fitted

with

essential

equipment

having

passenger cabin length

exceeding 9 feet

5

0

0

15

7.5

5

33.63

8703.22.45

---- Microbus, CBU

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

---

Reconditioned

vehicles

exceeding

1000

cc

but

not

exceeding 1200 cc :

8703.31.31

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU

25

5

45

15

7.5

5

135.91

8703.31.32

---- Ambulance fitted

with

essential

equipment

having

passenger cabin length

exceeding 9 feet

5

0

0

15

7.5

5

33.63

8703.31.33

---- Microbus, CBU

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

---

Other

vehicles

exceeding 1000 cc but

not exceeding 1200 cc

:

8703.31.41

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU

25

5

45

15

7.5

5

135.91

8703.31.42

---- Motor cars, CKD

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

228

H.S. Code

Description

CD

RD

SD

VAT

AT

AIT

Total

Tax

Incidence

(TTI)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

8703.31.43

---- Other vehicles,

CKD

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

8703.31.44

---- Ambulance fitted

with

essential

equipment

having

passenger cabin length

exceeding 9 feet

5

0

0

15

7.5

5

33.63

8703.31.45

---- Microbus, CBU

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

---

Reconditioned

vehicles

exceeding

1200

cc

but

not

exceeding 1500 cc :

8703.31.51

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU

25

5

60

15

7.5

5

159.80

8703.31.52

---- Ambulance fitted

with

essential

equipment

having

passenger cabin length

exceeding 9 feet

5

0

0

15

7.5

5

33.63

8703.31.53

---- Microbus, CBU

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

---

Other

vehicles

exceeding 1200 cc but

not exceeding 1500 cc

:

8703.31.61

---- Motor cars and

other

vehicles,

including

station

wagons, CBU

25

5

60

15

7.5

5

159.80

8703.31.62

---- Motor cars, CKD

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

8703.31.63

---- Other vehicles,

CKD

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

8703.31.64

---- Ambulance fitted

with

essential

equipment

having

passenger cabin length

exceeding 9 feet

5

0

0

15

7.5

5

33.63

8703.31.65

---- Microbus, CBU

25

5

20

15

7.5

5

96.10

229