
--- PAGE 1 ---
 
†iwR÷vW© bs wW G-1 
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU 
 
AwZwi³ msL¨v 
KZ…©cÿ KZ…©K cÖKvwkZ 
  e„n¯úwZevi, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh 
Ministry of Food 
NOTIFICATION 
Dated the 17 April 2016 
S.R.O. No. 98-Law/2016 In exercise of the powers conferred by section 
89 of the Food Safety Act, 2013, the Government is pleased to publish the 
following English translation of the Act to be call ed the Authentic English Text 
of the Act, and it shall be effective from the date  on which the Act comes into 
force under sub-section (2) of section 1 of the Act : 
The Food Safety Act, 2013 
(Act No. 43 of 2013) 
[10 th  October, 2013] 
 
An Act to make provisions for the establishment of an efficient and 
effective authority and for regulating, through coordination, the activities relating 
to food production, import, processing, stock, supp ly, marketing and sales, so as 
to ensure the rights toward access to safe food thr ough appropriate application of 
scientific process, upon repealing and reenacting t he existing laws connected 
thereto. 
Whereas it is necessary to ensure the rights toward  access to safe food for 
the protection of human health and life; and 
(6271) 
g~j¨ t  UvKv 40 .00 

--- PAGE 2 ---
6272 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
Whereas it is necessary to make provisions for the establishment of an 
efficient and effective authority and for regulatin g, through coordination, the 
activities relating to food production, import, pro cessing, stock, supply, 
marketing and sales, so as to ensure the rights tow ard access to safe food through 
appropriate application of scientific process, upon  repealing and reenacting the 
existing law connected thereto; 
It is hereby enacted as follows :  
CHAPTER I 
Preliminary 
1. Short title and commencement. (1) This Act may be called the Food 
Safety Act, 2013. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Go vernment may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Definitions. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context  
(1) “Authority” means the Bangladesh Food Safety Au thority 
established under section 5; 
(2) “insecticide or pesticide residue” means any sp ecified substance in 
food or any such condition thereof that results fro m the use of 
insecticides or pesticides during its production, i mportation, 
processing, storing, supply, sale or marketing and contains the 
parent compound of the insecticides or pesticides, derivatives, 
conversion products, residue of metabolites, reacti on products or 
created impurities and presence of which is conside red to 
significantly intoxicate any food product, and also  includes the 
residues contaminated from environment; 
(3) “food” means any edible substance, whether proc essed, partially 
processed or unprocessed, which are edible by chewi ng, sucking or 
licking (such as food grains, pulses, fish, meat, m ilk, eggs, edible 
oil, fruits, vegetables, etc.) or by drinking (such  as-normal water, 
aerated water, carbonated water, energy drink, etc. ) and also 
includes such other ingredient or raw material that  is used during 
food production and food process as a nutrient for human survival, 
and for enhancing nutrition and protecting health; 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6273  
 
Explanation.  
(a) “food” includes all colouring or flavouring mat ters, spices, 
additives, preservatives, antioxidants, which are n ot 
components of principal food but are used for the p urposes of 
manufacturing, preservation or production thereof; 
(b) “food” includes such other substances that are declared as 
food, for the purpose of this Act, by the Governmen t by 
notification in the official Gazette from time to time : 
 but does not include drugs or herbal medicine, nar cotics and 
cosmetics. 
(4) “Food Court” means a Pure Food Court to be desi gnated as such 
under section 64; 
(5) “food production” means the process of converti ng any ingredient 
of food into food products to which other processes  may also be 
integrated; 
(6) “food laboratory” means any food laboratory or institution, by 
whatever name it may be called, established under a ny Act or to be 
recognised by the Government; 
(7) “Food Analyst” means an analyst appointed under  sub-section (1) 
of section 45, and also includes a person dischargi ng the duties of a 
food analyst under sub-section (2); 
(8) “food business” means any activity relating to production, 
processing, packaging, storage, transport, import, distribution or 
sale of food; and also includes the activities rela ting to manufacture 
of food  products or sale of food ingredients inclu ding storage, 
supply, delivery or services thereof; 
(9) “food business operator” means any person or en tity who runs a 
food business under the provisions of any law for t he time being in 
force or under any regulation, and is the proprieto r of, or 
responsible to, such business; 
(10) “food additives” means a substance, added to f ood for special 
purpose within the limit prescribed by regulation, which is not 
normally consumed as a food, but is used, as a typical ingredient, in 
food during processing, manufacturing, packaging an d preservation 
thereof to arrive, directly or indirectly, at an in tended usefulness, 
and impacts the food to keep its quality intact wit hout using any 
adulterant or other contaminant; 

--- PAGE 4 ---
6274 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
(11) “food establishment” means any land, building,  vehicle, van, tent, 
or any place, open, covered or enclosed, or infrast ructure owned by 
such person or entity that carries any activity relating to production, 
processing, import, supply, storage, distribution o r sale of any 
article of food or food ingredient, and also includ es such 
infrastructure that stands on any streams, lakes, s ea-shore, drains, 
ditches, rivers, dock or other water body; 
(12) “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Authority ; 
(13) “Penal Code” means the Penal Code, 1860 (Act N o. XLV of 1860); 
(14) “contaminant” means any substance which may, w hether or not 
added to food, be present in such food as a result of production, 
processing, manufacture, packaging, transport or storage thereof, or 
as a result of environmental contamination or other  reasons, but 
does not include insect fragments, rodent hairs or fur and other 
extraneous matter; 
(15) “container” means a receptacle or package whic h is not made from 
any previously used container harmful to health, an d which is free 
from dust, unauthorized amount of biological or che mical 
contaminant, arsenic, mercury or any heavy metal ha rmful to 
health; 
(16) “misbranded food” means any article of food or  food ingredient 
which is produced, imported, manufactured or labell ed in an 
unlawful manner resembling any other lawfully marke ted article of 
food or food ingredient on sale, whether the elemen t, ingredient, 
purity or quality of such lawful food is present in it or not; 
(17) “safe food” means a food that is pure and hygi enic for public health 
according to its intended use and utility; 
(18) “anti-food safety practice” means any act whic h is carried out in 
contravention of the restrictions imposed upon a fo od business 
mentioned in Chapter V of this Act; 
(19) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules and, un til such rules are 
made, prescribed through a written order made by th e Authority 
upon government approval; 
(20) “Inspector” means any food safety inspector ap pointed under sub-
section (1) of section 51, and also includes a pers on discharging the 
duties of a food safety inspector under sub-section (2); 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6275  
 
(21) “residue of veterinary or fishery drug” means the parent compound 
or its metabolites, which is used in veterinary or fishery drug, and 
which is residue of drug present in the edible port ion of any animal 
or fishery food product or in the ingredient of any food of animal or 
fish, and also includes residues of associated impu rities thereof, if 
any; 
(22) “Council” means the National Food Safety Manag ement Advisory 
Council established under section 3 of this Act; 
(23) “processing aid” means any matter or substance  other than 
apparatus or utensils which is not consumed directl y as food, but 
used as a food ingredient during treating or proces sing a food to 
fulfill a certain technological purpose, or may res ult in the 
unintentional but unavoidable presence of residues or derivatives in 
the final product after processing; 
(24) “regulations” means regulations made under thi s Act; 
(25) “Code of Criminal Procedure” means the Code of  Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (Act No. V of 1898); 
(26) “extraneous matter” means any matter which may  be contained in 
food due to being used in the raw materials, or at the processing or 
packaging stage of such food during the production or manufacture 
thereof but does not render such food unsafe; 
(27) “ rules” means rules made under this Act; 
(28) “person” includes, whether incorporated or not , any company, 
organization, commercial entity, partnership busine ss, society, club 
or association; 
(29) “adulterated food” means a food or any part th ereof  
(a) which is, with a view to making it coloured, fl avoured, 
preserved, processed or attractive, mixed with such  amount of 
ingredients that is harmful to public health and is prohibited in 
law; or 
(b) which is, with a view to making it coloured, co ated or stained, 
mixed excessively with such amount of ingredients t hat 
impairs the food and diminishes the food value or n utritive 
qualities of such food; or 

--- PAGE 6 ---
6276 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
(c) from which any of the normal constituents has b een wholly or 
in part abstracted, and different types of ingredie nts, 
comparatively cheap in value, has been mixed with i t to 
readily increase its weight or quantity or to make it attractive 
so as to render it injurious to money or health of the food 
consumers; 
(30) “fish” means cartilaginous and bony fish of an y kind, shrimp of 
fresh or saline water, amphibians, tortoises, turtl es, crustacean 
animals, molluscs, oysters, echinoderms and frogs a t any stage in 
their life cycle and also includes those aquatic an imals that are 
declared as fish by the Government, by notification  in the official 
Gazette from time to time; 
(31) “member” means any member of the Authority and , where 
applicable, also includes the Chairman; 
(32) “President” means the President of the Council  and, where 
applicable, also includes the Vice-President of the Council; 
(33) “Coordination Committee” means the Central Foo d Safety 
Management Coordination Committee to be constituted  under 
section 15 of this Act. 
CHAPTER II 
Institutional Structure of Food Safety System 
3. National Food Safety Management Advisory Council. (1) To carry 
out the purposes of this Act, there shall be a coun cil to be called the National 
Food Safety Management Advisory Council for providi ng necessary advice and 
direction to the Authority and all concerned with t he food safety management as 
to formulate policy and plan on food safety system,  and on any other matter 
ancillary thereto. 
(2) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely :  
(a) Minister in charge of the Ministry of Food, who  shall also be its 
President; 
(b) Cabinet Secretary, who shall also be its Vice-P resident; 
(c) a member of the Parliament nominated by the Spe aker of the House 
of the Nation; 

--- PAGE 7 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6277  
 
(d) Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration; 
(e) Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs; 
(f) Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfar e; 
(g) Secretary, Ministry of Commerce; 
(h) Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture; 
(i) Secretary, Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock;  
(j) Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forest; 
(k) Secretary, Ministry of Industries; 
(l) Secretary, Ministry of Science and Technology; 
(m) Secretary, Ministry of Information; 
(n) Secretary, Local Government Division; 
(o) Secretary, Finance Division; 
(p) Secretary, Legislative and Parliamentary Affair s Division; 
(q) Chairman, Bangladesh Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research; 
(r) Chairman, Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission; 
(s) Chairman, Bangladesh Food Safety Authority; 
(t) Director General, Directorate of Health Service s; 
(u) Director General, Directorate of Food; 
(v) Director General, Directorate of National Consu mer Rights 
Protection; 
(w) Director General, Bangladesh Standards and Test ing Institution; 
(x) Director General, Bangladesh Accreditation Boar d; 
(y) Director, Institute of Nutrition and Food Scien ce, University of 
Dhaka; 
(z) Chairman, Department of Chemistry, University o f Dhaka; 
(za) President, Federation of Bangladesh Chambers o f Commerce and 
Industries; 
(zb) a City Corporation Mayor and a Upazilla Parisa d Chairman 
nominated by the Government; and 
(zc) Secretary, Ministry of Food, who shall also be  its Member-
Secretary. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
6278 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
(3) Save as the members referred to in clauses (c) and (zb) of sub-section (2), 
other members of the Council shall be ex-officio members of the Council. 
(4) The Council may, if necessary, co-opt any relev ant person as a member 
of the Council. 
Explanation. In this section, “Secretary” also includes Senior Secretary. 
4. Meetings of the Council. (1) The meeting of the Council shall be held 
at least twice a year. 
(2) Subject to other provisions of this section, th e Council may determine 
the procedures of its meeting. 
(3) The meeting of the Council shall be held at suc h place, date and time as 
may be determined by the President. 
(4) The President shall preside over all meetings of the Council : 
Provided that in the absence of the President, the Vice-President or in the 
absence of both of them, any other member of the Co uncil nominated by the 
President shall preside over the meeting. 
(5) Presence of one-third of the total members of t he Council shall form the 
quorum of a meeting and decisions of the Council sh all be taken by the majority 
of votes of the members present at the meeting. 
(6) No act or proceeding of the Council shall be in valid or be called in 
question merely on the ground of any vacancy in, or  any defect in the 
constitution of, the Council. 
5. Establishment of Bangladesh Food Safety Authority, etc. (1) As 
soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the Government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, establish an Authority to be called the 
Bangladesh Food Safety Authority to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession 
and a common seal with power, subject to the provis ions of this Act, to acquire, 
hold and transfer of property, both movable and imm ovable, subject to prior 
approval of the Government and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 
6. Office of the Authority. The Head Office of the Authority shall be at 
Dhaka, and in case of necessity, the Authority may, with the prior approval of the 
Government, establish its branch office at any place in Bangladesh. 
7. Constitution of the Authority. (1) The Authority shall consist of a 
Chairman and four members. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6279  
 
(2)  The Chairman and the members shall be appointe d by the Government 
and they shall be the full-time officers of the Authority. 
(3) The Chairman shall be the Chief Executive of the Authority. 
(4) The salary, allowances, status and other terms and conditions of service 
of the Chairman and of the members shall be determined by the Government. 
(5) The Chairman and the members shall discharge such duties and perform 
such functions as may be determined or assigned to them by the Act or by the 
rules or regulations made thereunder. 
(6) No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid or be called in 
question merely on the ground of any vacancy in, or  any defect in the 
constitution of, the Authority. 
8. Tenure of the Chairman and the members. The Chairman and the 
members shall hold their office for 4 (four) years from the date of appointment. 
9. Qualification and disqualification of the Chairman and the 
members. (1) A person having at least 25 (twenty five) years  of professional 
experience and broad range of specialized knowledge and expertise in the field of 
food shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairman of the Authority. 
(2) Persons having at least 20 (twenty) years of pr ofessional experience and 
broad range of relevant specialized knowledge and e xpertise on the following 
subjects shall be eligible for appointment, one fro m each, as a member, 
namely:  
(a) public health and nutrition; 
(b) food industry or food production; 
(c) food consumption and consumers’ rights; and 
(d) food related laws and policies. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in other provisions of this 
section, no person shall be eligible for appointmen t as the Chairman or a 
member, if  
(a) he is not the citizen of Bangladesh; 
(b) his age exceeds 60 (sixty) years on the date of  appointment; 
(c) he is a loan defaulter in any bank or financial  institution; 
(d) he is an undischarged insolvent by any competen t court; 

--- PAGE 10 ---
6280 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
(e) he has been, on conviction for a criminal offen ce involving moral 
turpitude, sentenced to imprisonment for a term of 2 (two) years or 
more, unless a period of 5 (five) years has elapsed  since his release 
from imprisonment; and 
(f) he is, directly or indirectly, involved in any food business. 
(4) The Chairman and the members, while discharging  duties of the 
Authority, shall not hold any position or discharge  any duties of any other office 
or organization or authority or be engaged in any office for profit. 
10. Resignation, termination or inability in discharging dutie s. (1) The 
Chairman or any member may, by issuing at least 3 ( three) months prior notice, 
resign his office by writing under his hand to the Government and the post shall 
fall vacant from the date of acceptance of the resignation by the Government. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-secti on (1), the Government 
may terminate the Chairman or any Member, if he  
(a) is declared insolvent by any competent court; 
(b) is convicted by any competent court of an offen ce involving moral 
turpitude; 
(c) is declared by any competent court to be the un sound mind; 
(d) becomes physically or mentally incapable of per forming functions 
of the Chairman or of a member; 
(e) is engaged in any other post with remuneration other than his own 
duties; 
(f) shows negligence in discharging duties as Chair man or member or 
breaches trust or gains any financial or other benefit illegally; or 
(g) holds any position or discharge any duty mentio ned in sub-section (4) 
of section 9 or engaged in any office of profit. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-secti on (1), the Chairman or 
any member shall not be terminated from his service  without giving an 
opportunity to defend himself. 
11. Filling up temporary vacancy to the post of the Cha irman. If a 
vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairman or if the Chairman is unable to 
carry out the functions of his office due to absenc e, illness or any other reason, 
the senior-most Member of the Authority shall tempo rarily  take over the charge 
of the Chairman until and unless newly appointed Ch airman joins his office or 
the Chairman becomes capable to resume the functions of his office. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6281  
 
12. Meeting of the Authority. (1) The Authority may, subject to the 
provisions of this section, determine the procedure of its own meetings. 
(2) The agenda, date, time and place of meetings sh all be determined by the 
Chairman and such meetings shall be convened by the  Secretary with the 
approval of the Chairman. 
(3) The Chairman shall preside over all the meeting s of the Authority, but 
in his absence, any other member nominated by him s hall preside over the 
meeting. 
(4) To constitute a quorum at a meeting, the presen ce of the Chairman and 
at least two other members shall be required, but i n a adjourned meeting no such 
quorum shall be required. 
(5) Decisions of the meetings shall be taken by the  majority of votes of the 
Chairman and the Members present at the meeting, and in the event of equality of 
votes, the Chairman or the Member, as the case may be, presiding over the 
meeting shall have a second or a casting vote. 
(6) The Chairman may, in consultation with other Me mbers, if necessary, 
invite any other person concerned with the agenda o f the meeting, but such 
person shall not have any right to vote in taking decision. 
13. Duties and functions of the Authority. (1) The main duties and 
functions of the Authority shall be to regulate and monitor the activities related to 
manufacture, import, processing, storage, distribut ion and sale of food so as to 
ensure access to safe food through exercise of appropriate scientific methods, and 
to coordinate the activities of all the organizatio ns concerned with food safety 
management. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-sect ion (1), the Authority 
shall discharge the following duties, namely :  
(a) to scientifically define all the available food s from plants, animals 
and other major sources and provide support to the concerned 
authorities or organization in updating quality par ameters, and 
monitor the implementation of their activities to ensure food safety; 
(b) to render necessary support to the concerned au thorities or 
organizations in updating and upgrading the food st andards or 
guidelines to the highest level of safety done by t he same under 
existing laws; 
(c) to specify food standards and formulate guideli nes, where no 
quality and safety parameter or guideline of such f ood is 
determined under existing laws; 

--- PAGE 12 ---
6282 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
(d) to provide the concerned authority or organizat ion with necessary 
support in updating or upgrading the permissible li mit at its highest 
safety level for use of contaminants, microbial con taminants, 
fertilizer, residue of insecticides and pesticides,  residue of 
veterinary and fishery drugs, heavy metals, process ing aids, 
additives or preservatives, mycotoxin, antibiotics,  medicine related 
active substances and growth promoters in the food product 
determined by any other  authority or organization under the 
existing laws, and monitor implementation thereof; 
(e) to determine permissible limit of use of contam inants through 
exercise of scientific methods, where the permissib le limit of 
contaminants, microbial contaminants, fertilizers, residue of 
insecticides or pesticides, residue of veterinary a nd fishery drugs, 
heavy metals, processing aid and, food additive or preservatives, 
mycotoxin, antibiotic, medicine related active subs tances and 
growth promoters is not determined under any existing law; 
(f) to provide  necessary support to the relevant a uthority or 
organization in specifying permissible limit of radiation in food and 
implementation monitoring thereof; 
(g) to provide  necessary support to the concerned authority or 
organization in formulating and implementing accreditation policies 
to be followed by the certification bodies having a uthority for 
issuing certificate of food safety management syste m to carry out 
food business; 
(h) to provide  necessary support to the concerned authority or 
organization in formulating procedural guidelines f or accrediting 
food testing laboratories and implementation monitoring thereof; 
(i) to provide  necessary advice to the concerned a uthority in 
monitoring and taking immediate corrective measures  to remove 
the non-conformance observed during monitoring of l aboratories 
engaged in measuring food adulterants and quality; 
(j) to specify standards and prescribe testing  pro cedures, if not 
otherwise done, of any food to be imported under existing laws, and 
accordingly provide necessary support to the concerned authority or 
organization to ensure adherence to acceptable qual ity parameters 
of food and implementation monitoring thereof; 

--- PAGE 13 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6283  
 
(k) to prescrible the procedure relating to packagi ng and expressing 
claims on health, nutrition, special dietary uses a nd categorization 
of packaged food and provide necessary support to t he concerned 
authority or organization for its implementation; 
(l) to prescrible the procedure for assessment, ana lysis, communication 
and management of probable risk, and to identify in creasing risk 
and introduce regular food alert system; and 
(m) to collect food samlpes and conduct analysis an d exchange of 
information with the law enforcing agencies. 
(3) In performing its assigned duties and functions , the Authority shall take 
the following steps, namely:  
(a) to provide scientific advice and technical supp ort to the 
Government in formulating food and nutrition policy  or rules, and 
in revising or updating existing policies or regulations; 
(b) to search, collect and make comparative analysi s of relevant 
scientific and technical information on the followi ng subjects, such 
as:  
(i) identification of health risks exposures due to  food 
consumption; 
(ii) identification of incidence and prevalence of biological risk; 
(iii) identification of adulteration of contaminant s in food; 
(iv) identification of incidence and prevalence of residues of 
various contaminants; 
(c) to develop methods of assessment of possible ri sk and take 
necessary initiatives to update the existing risk a ssessment methods 
involving all relevant stakeholders and implementation monitoring; 
(d) to sent emergency food safety alert messages on  the health and 
nutritional risks of food to the Government, releva nt organizations 
and officials and take necessary steps to inform th e public of those 
massages; 
(e) to provide scientific and technical advice and assistance to the 
Government in implementation of crisis management p rocedures 
with regard to food safety; 

--- PAGE 14 ---
6284 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
(f) to establish a food safety network, up to field  level, among the 
authorities or organizations concerned with the foo d safety 
management system with an aim to facilitate scientific co-operation 
framework through co-ordination of activities, exch ange of 
information, development and implementation of joint projects, and 
exchange of experties and best parctices; 
(g) to provide scientific and technical advice and assistance to the 
Government to avail cooperation from international organizations; 
(h) to organize training programmes on food safety for the personnel, 
who are involved, directly or indirectly, with the implementation of 
this Act and who are engaged in food business; 
(i) to provide necessary support to the concerned a uthority or 
organization in upgrading the existing standards of  food articles, 
including sanitary and phyto-sanitary measures, to international 
standards; 
(j) to coordinate the food safety and quality setti ng activities 
undertaken by governmental, non-governmental and in ternational 
organizations; 
(k) to establish effective linkages among the autho rities or 
organizations engaged in activities relating to tes ting, analysis and 
standard setting of food articles; 
(l) to identify strategies to harmonize safety and quality standards 
between the international and domestic food articles; 
(m) to create public awareness towards the safety a nd quality of food 
articles; and 
(n) to perform such other activities as may be dire cted by the 
Government, from time to time, for the purposes of this Act. 
(4) The Authority shall make regulations to carry o ut the purposes of this 
section. 
Explanation. In this section  
(a) Òfood safety management system Ó means the acceptable 
arrangement of Good Agricultural Practices, Good Aq ua-cultural 
Practices, Good Manufacturing Practices, Good Hygie nic Practices 
during food production, processing, preparation and  marking of 
safe and healthy foods, Hazard Analysis, Food Safet y Emergency 
Response, Residual Control System and Food Safety A uditing 
System and practice of relevant subjects which exis t in the 
approved guidance or directives issued for carrying  out food 
business to ensure the compliance of the standards and obligations 
prescribed by the existing laws; and 

--- PAGE 15 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6285  
 
(b) Òhazard Ó means presence of any substance in food or prevail ing 
condition of food created or naturally produced due  to any 
biological, chemical or physical effect that may ca use any adverse 
effect on human health. 
14. Secretary, officers and staff of the Authority and organogram, 
etc. (1)  There shall be a Secretary of the Authority, w ho shall be appointed on 
such terms and conditions as the Government may determine. 
(2) The Secretary shall discharge the following duties, namely:  
(a) to fix agenda, date, time and venue of the meet ing of the Authority 
as directed by the Chairman; 
(b) to prepare the proceeding of the meetings accor ding to the decision 
of the Authority; 
(c) to maintain the relevant files and records of a ctivities carried out by 
the Chairman and Members; and 
(d) to discharge such other duties as the Authority  may direct. 
(3) The Authority may, subject to the organogram ap proved by the 
Government, appoint such number of officers and emp loyees as may be 
necessary for its efficient performance, and the te rms and conditions of the 
service of such officers and employees shall be determined by regulations. 
(4) For efficient performance of the duties and fun ctions of the Authority, 
there shall be at least 5(five) divisions headed by  5(five) Directors in its 
organizational structure, namely:  
(a) Food Safety Surveillance and Adjudication Affai rs; 
(b) Food Safety Laboratory Network Coordination Aff airs; 
(c) Food Safety Standardization Coordination Affair s; 
(d) Cosnumers’ Concerns, Food Safety System and Ris k Management; 
and 
(e) Establishment, Finance, Human Resource and Corp orate Affairs of 
the BFSA. 
(5) The Chairman shall have the administrative cont rol over all officers and 
employees of the Authority. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
6286 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
CHAPTER III 
Committees, etc. 
15. Formation of Central Food Safety Management Coordin ation 
Committee, etc. (1)  For carrying out the purposes of this Act, the Government 
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, con stitute a committee to be called 
the ÕCentral Food Safety Management Coordination Committ ee Õ  consisting of 
the following members to coordinate among the autho rities or organizations 
involved directly or indirectly in food safety management system, namely:  
(a) Chairman Bangladesh Food Safety Authority, who shall also be the 
Chairperson of the Committee; 
(b) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Ministry of Food; 
(c) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Ministry of Agriculture; 
(d) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock; 
(e) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Ministry of Science and Technologies; 
(f) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Ministry of Commerce; 
(g) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forest; 
(h) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Ministry of Industries; 
(i) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare; 
(j) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs; 
(k) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Cabinet Division; 
(l) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Local Government Division; 

--- PAGE 17 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6287  
 
(m) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Legislative and Parliamentary Affairs Division; 
(n) an officer, not below the rank of Joint-Secreta ry, nominated by the 
Law and Justice Division; 
(o) Director General, Department of Environment, ex -officio; 
(p) Director General, Department of Agriculture Ext ension, ex-officio; 
(q) Director General, Department of Fisheries, ex-o fficio; 
(r) Director General, Department of Livestock Servi ces, ex-officio; 
(s) Director General, Directorate of National Consu mer Rights 
Protection, ex-officio; 
(t) Director General, Bangladesh Standards and Test ing Institution,  
ex-officio; 
(u) Director General, Bangladesh Accreditation Boar d, ex-officio; 
(v) Director, Institute of Public Health, ex-offici o; 
(w) two representatives nominated by the Government  from relevant 
food production related organizations; 
(x) two representatives nominated by the Government  from the 
consumers Õ food related organizations; 
(y) two representatives nominated by the Government  from food 
processing related organizations; 
(z) two representatives nominated by the Government  from food 
business related organizations; 
(za) two representatives nominated by the Governmen t from food 
laboratories; and 
(zb) Secretary, Bangladesh Food Safety Authority, W ho shall also be its 
Member-Secretary. 
(2) The Coordination Committee shall take initiativ e to ensure necessary 
institutional support from relevant authorities or organizations for successful 
performance of the duties and functions assigned to the Authority under this Act. 
(3) The members of the Coordination Committee on be half of their 
respective organizations shall take proper initiati ve to extend necessary 
institutional support, facilities and assistance to  the Authority according to its 
requirement. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
6288 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
16. Meetings of the Coordination Committee. (1) The meetings of the 
Coordination Committee shall be held at least 3(three) times a year at such place, 
date and time as may be determined by its Chairperson. 
(2) The Chairperson of the Coordination Committee s hall preside over all 
its meetings and in his absence, any other member o f the Committee directed by 
him and in absence of such direction, any other mem ber nominated by the 
members present in the meeting shall preside. 
(3) The Coordination Committee may, if necessary, c o-opt or invite any 
relevant person as a member of the Coordination Committee in the meeting. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Coordination Committee 
may determine the procedures of its own meeting. 
17. Technical Committee. (1) For carrying out the purposes of this Act, 
the Authority may form such numbers of Techinal Com mittees, as may be 
necessary, consisting of experts concerning to food  safety or related subject to 
assist and advise in conducting its functions. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), among others, the 
Techinal Committees may be formed on the following subjects, namely:  
(a) food additives, flavorings, processing aids and  materials; 
(b) pesticides and antibiotics residues; 
(c) genetically modified organisms and foods; 
(d) biological risk and biosecurity; 
(e) contaminants in the food chain; 
(f) labeling and packaging; 
(g) methods of sample collection and analysis; and 
(h) any other subject prescribed by rules. 
(3) The Technical Committee may, if necessary, invite the relevant industry 
and consumer representatives and experts in its meeting. 
(4) The Technical Committee shall conduct its functions in accordance with 
the opinion of the majority of its members. 
(5) The Authority shall, for public interest, publi sh the opinion, if accepted, 
of the Technical Committee on scientific research i n its annual report and 
immediately take necessary steps to publish it in w idely circulated daily 
newspapers including its website to make it accessible by the public. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6289  
 
(6) The composition and terms of reference of the T echnical Committees 
and the matters ancillary there to shall be prescribed by rules. 
18. Other Committees. The Authority may, if necessary, form such 
numbers of other Committees, as may be necessary, c onsisting of its one or more 
members for special purposes and determine the procedure of such Committees. 
19. Directives to other authorities, etc. (1) The Authority may, from 
time to time, issue directives related to food safe ty and quality to any authority, 
organization or person concerned directly or indire ctly with food safety 
management, and such authority, organization or per son shall be bound to 
comply with such directives. 
(2) The Authority may, for the purposes of this Act , require any authority, 
organization or person to render necessary assistan ce, and such authority, 
organization or person shall be bound to comply with such requirements. 
CHAPTER IV 
Fund, Budget and Accounts Audit 
20. Fund of the Authority. (1) The Authority shall have a fund and the 
money received from the following sources shall be credited to the fund, 
namely:- 
(a) grants made by the Government; and 
(b) money received from any other sources with the prior approval of the 
Government. 
(2) The money of the fund shall be deposited in the  name of the Authority 
in any scheduled bank and the fund shall be maintai ned in such manner as may 
be prescribed by rules, but, until such rules are m ade, the fund may be 
maintained according to the orders or directions issued by the Government. 
(3) The Authority shall, subject to government rule s and regulations, meet 
necessary expenses from the fund. 
Explanation. In this section “scheduled bank” means the schedule d bank 
as defined in article 2 (j) of Bangladesh Bank Orde r, 1972 (P.O. No. 127 of 
1972). 
21. Annual Budget. The Authority shall, by such time in each year as t he 
Government may determine, submit to the Government an annual budget for the 
next financial year showing the estimated sums whic h are likely to be required 
from the Government during that financial year for the Authority. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
6290 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
22. Accounts and Audit. (1) The Authority shall properly maintain the 
accounts of its fund and prepare an annual statement of the accounts. 
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor General of Banglade sh, hereinafter 
referred to as the Auditor General, shall audit acc ounts of the Authority every 
year, and submit one copy of his audit report to be  Government and one copy to 
the Authority. 
(3) Besides the audit mentioned in sub-section (2),  the accounts of the 
Authority may also be audited by a Chartered Accoun tant as defined in article 
2(1)(b) of the Bangladesh Chartered Accountants  Or der, 1973 (P.O. No. 2 of 
1973) and the Authority may appoint one or more Cha rtered Accountants in this 
behalf. 
(4) The Chartered Accountant appointed under sub-se ction (3) shall be 
entitled to receive such remunerations as may be determined by the Government. 
(5) For conducting audit under sub-section (2) or ( 3), the Auditor General 
or any other person authorized by him in this behalf or the Chartered Accountant, 
as the case may be, shall have access to all record s, documents and papers, cash 
or deposit kept in bank, security, stock and other properties of the Authority and 
may examine any member, officer or employee of the Authority. 
CHAPTER V 
Prohibitions related to Food Safety Management System 
23. Use of poisonous elements. No person shall, directly or indirectly, by 
himself or by any other person acting on his behalf , use or include in any article 
of food any chemical or ingredient or substance (su ch as: calcium carbide, 
formalin, sodium cyclamate), insecticides or pestic ides (such as: DDT, PCB oil, 
etc.), or intoxicated food colour of flavouring matter, whether attractive or not, or 
any other intoxicated additives or processing aids,  which may cause injury or 
toxicity to human health in any article of food; or  shall store, market or sell any 
such article of food or food ingredient possessing such matter. 
24. Use of radioactive, heavy metals etc. in excess of acceptable limit.  
No person shall, directly or indirectly, by himself  or by any other person acting 
on his behalf, use or include in any article of foo d or food ingredient any 
radioactive or irradiated matter or naturally of ot herwise occurring similar matter 
or heavy metal in violation of maximum acceptable l imit prescribed by 
regulations or by any other law for the time being in force. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6291  
 
25. Production, import or marketing of adulterated arti cle of food or 
food ingredient, etc. No person shall, directly or indirectly, with an in tention 
to sell, by himself or by any other person acting on his behalf, produce or import, 
process, store, supply or sell any adulterated article of food or food ingredient. 
26. Production of sub-standard food, etc. No person shall, directly or 
indirectly, with an intention to sell, by himself o r by any other person acting on 
his behalf, produce or import, process, store, dist ribute, or sell any article of food 
or food ingredient which is of sub-standard for hum an consumption in 
comparison with the standard prescribed by regulations. 
27. Uses of food additives or processing aids.  No person shall, directly 
or indirectly, by himself or by any other person ac ting on his behalf, use or 
include in any additive or processing aid in violat ion of maximum acceptable 
limit prescribed by regulations in any article of f ood or food ingredient; or shall 
import, process, store, distribute or sell such art icle of food or food ingredient 
possessing such matter. 
28. Keeping of used industrial oil, industrial waste, a dulterants, 
pollutants, etc. in food establishment. No person shall, directly or indirectly, 
by himself or by any other person acting on his beh alf, keep or allow to keep in 
his food establishment any used industrial oil, industrial waste or adulterants with 
an intention to mix them with any article of food or food ingredient. 
29. Expired article of food or food ingredients. No person shall, 
directly or indirectly, by himself or by any other person acting on his behalf, 
import, process, store, supply or sell any article of food or food ingredient after 
the date of its expiry. 
30. Uses of growth promoters, insecticides, pesticides or drug residues, 
microbes, etc. No person shall, directly or indirectly, by himself  or by any 
other person acting on his behalf, use or include i n any article of food or food 
ingredient any insecticide or pesticide residue, ve terinary or aquaculture drug 
residue, hormone, antibiotic or growth promoters re sidue, solvent residue, active 
ingredients of drugs, microbes or parasites in exce ss to the maximum residue 
limit prescribed by regulations or by any other law  for the time being in force; or 
shall store, market or sell any such article of foo d or food ingredient possessing 
such matter. 
31. Genetically modified food, organic food, functional  food, 
proprietary food, etc. No person shall, directly or indirectly, by himself  or by 
any other person acting on his behalf, without taki ng approval in the manner 

--- PAGE 22 ---
6292 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
prescribed by regulations or under any other law fo r the time being in force, 
produce, import, process, store, distribute or sell  any genetically modified or 
engineered food, organic food, irradiated food, pro prietary food, novel food, 
functional food, foods for special dietary uses, nu traceuticals and any such other 
food. 
Explanation. In this section  
(a) “proprietary food” or “novel food” means any fo od for which no 
standards is yet specified but is not unsafe and wh ich does not 
contain any substance or matter prohibited by regulations; 
(b) “food for special dietary uses”, “functional fo od”, “nutraceutical 
food” or “health supplement” means any food prepare d in 
compliance with the special formula and maintained the qualities 
prescribed by regulations to meet the necessity of special dietary for 
any special or substantial physical condition or an y special diseases 
or illness; 
(c)  “organic food” means any food produced in acco rdance with 
specified organic production process; and 
(d) “genetically modified or engineered food” means  any article of 
food or food ingredient composed of or containing g enetically 
modified or engineered organisms obtained through m odern 
biotechnology, or produced from but not containing genetically 
modified or engineered organisms obtained through m odern 
biotechnology. 
32. Food packaging and labelling. No person shall, directly or 
indirectly, by himself or by any other person acting on his behalf,  
(a) manufacture, distribute or sell any packaged fo od or food ingredient 
which is not packaged, marked and labelled in such manner as may 
be prescribed by regulations or any other law for t he time being in 
force; 
(b) inscribe any false information or claim, or any  mischieving or 
misleading information on the label mentioned in cl ause (a) 
concerning the food contained in the package or con cerning the 
quantity or the nutritive value implying medicinal or therapeutic 
claims or in relation to the place of origin of the said food; 
(c) manufacture, distribute or sell any packaged fo od or food ingredient 
without complying with the obligation of labelling it with a 

--- PAGE 23 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6293  
 
representation of clear information about the produ ction, packaging 
and expiry date of food and traceability informatio n in the manner 
prescribed by regulations; and 
(d) sell any packaged food or food ingredient by ch anging or erasing 
any information  inscribed on the label of the pack aged food 
product or food ingredient. 
33. Production, sale, etc. of food in unhygienic proces s regarded as 
hazardous to human health. No person, by himself or by any other person 
acting on his behalf shall manufacture, import, pro cess or sell any article of food 
or food ingredient in unhygienic process, in contra vention of the conditions and 
in deviation from the standard process specified by regulations or under any other 
law for the time being in force, which may cause harm to human health. 
34. Sale of diseased or decomposed fish, meat, milk, et c. No person, by 
himself or by any other person acting on his behalf , shall produce, store, or sell 
diseased or decomposed fish or fish product or meat  of diseased or dead animals 
or fowl or decomposed milk or egg or any food products made of such thing. 
35. Food serving or catering in hotels, restaurants or food premises.  
No person, by himself or by any other person acting  on his behalf, who render 
food serving or catering services in a hotel, resta urant or food premises, shall 
cause hazard to human health through irresponsibility, negligence or carelessness 
in deviation from the standard prescribed by regula tions or by any other law for 
the time being in force. 
36. Manufacture of food by a person suffering from any contagious 
disease. No person, by himself or by any other person acting  on his behalf, 
shall cause any article of food or food ingredient to be prepared, stored or sold by 
a person who is suffering from any contagious disease. 
37. Manufacture, sale, etc. of misbranded food. No person, by himself 
or by any other person acting on his behalf shall, directly or indirectly, 
manufacture, import, store, distribute or sell any misbranded article of food or 
food ingredient similar or resembling to any articl e of food or food ingredient 
marketed in the name of any trade mark or in any trade name registered under the 
Trademark Act, 2009 (Act No, XIX of 2009). 
38. Keeping and exhibiting the name, address and receip t or challan  of 
the concerned parties. Every food business operator or any other person 
acting on his behalf shall, while operating food bu siness, keep the name, address 
and receipt or challan of all parties involved in the manufacture, import,  
processing, storage, distribution or sale of any ar ticle of food or food ingredient; 
and shall be bound to exhibit the information to th e Authority or any officer 
designated by  it. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
6294 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
39. Production, sale, etc. of food without registration .No person shall 
manufacture, import, process, store or sell any art icle of food or food ingredient 
without registering a food business which is mandat ory under any law for the 
time being in force. 
40. Rendering cooperation to the Authority or any perso n authorized 
by it. Each food  business operator or any person acting o n his behalf shall, 
while operating food business, be bound to extend a ll kinds of cooperation to the 
Authority or to any officer designated by it at the  time of inspection, 
investigation, sample collection or testing of anything related to food business. 
41. False or misleading information in advertisement. No person shall, 
with the intention of marketing or selling any arti cle of food or food ingredient, 
cause harm to any consumer by giving any false or m isleading information or 
statement in advertisement in contravention of the conditions for advertisement 
prescribed by regulations. 
42. Making, printing or propagating of false advertisem ent. (1) No 
person shall make, print, publish or propagate any advertisement containing false 
information as to quality, nature, standard etc. of  any article of food or food 
ingredient through which people may be misguided. 
(2) In a suit filed under this section, the defenda nt, for defending himself, 
shall have to prove that  
(a) he was not aware of such false advertisement or  he has not come to 
know despite due diligence; and 
(b) he, as a maker, printer, publisher or propagato r has made, printed, 
published or propagated the advertisement in usual course of 
business. 
(3) Where any complaint is lodged against any perso n under this section in 
any court, the court shall, unless otherwise proved , presume that such 
manufacturer or seller has made the endeavor or ren dered the assistance to, print, 
publish or propagate such advertisement. 
CHAPTER VI 
Special Responsibilities of Food Business Operators 
43. Withdarwal of  substandard or risky or poisonous fo od. (1) If any 
person has  reason to believe that the article of f ood or food ingredient which he 
has produced, processed, supplied or sold does not comply with the standard 
prescribed by this Act or any law or contains any c ontaminant, radioactive or 

--- PAGE 25 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6295  
 
irradiated substances, or any poisonous or hazardous matter; he shall disclose and  
circulate the matter with reasons to the general pu blic, and shall, with an 
intimation to concerned authority, immediately take  necessary step to withdraw 
such article of food or food ingredient from the ma rket or consumers in the 
manner prescribed by regulations. 
(2) If the Authority has reason to believe that any  article of food or food 
ingredient produced, processed, supplied or sold by  any person, does not comply 
with the standard prescribed by this Act or any oth er law, or contains any 
contaminant, radioactive or irradiated substances, or any poisonous or hazardous 
matter, it shall issue an order directing the conce rned person to withdraw the 
suspected or risky article of food or food ingredie nt from the market or 
consumers, and such person shall, upon such directi on, take necessary steps to 
withdraw such article of food or food ingredient as  per the provision of  
sub-section (1). 
44. Special liabilities of producers, packers, distribu tors and sellers of 
food. (1) If any producer or packer of any article of foo d or food ingredient 
fails to comply with the conditions of this Act or rules or regulations made 
thereunder, such failure shall be considered to be violation of this Act. 
(2) A person who stores or supplies any article of food or food ingredient 
shall be liable to violate the provisions of this Act, if he  
(a) supplies any food after the expiry date; 
(b) stores or distributes food violating precaution ary instructions 
declared by the producers; 
(c) erases any information relating to safety of fo od, trade symbol or 
identification mark; 
(d) fails to provide required traceability informat ion of the producer or 
of the person from whom the food was received for s torage or 
distribution; or 
(e) receives any food for storage or distribution d espite knowing the 
fact that the food is unsafe. 
(3) A person who sells any article of food or food ingredient shall be liable 
to violate the provisions of this Act, if he  
(a) sells any food or stores it in a selling premis es after the expiry date; 
(b) preserves of stores or sells any food with a vi ew to selling in an 
unhygienic condition; 

--- PAGE 26 ---
6296 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
(c) erases any information relating to safety of fo od, trade symbol or 
identification mark; 
(d) fails to provide required traceability informat ion of the person from 
whom the food was received or of the distributor, or of the origin of 
the producer; or 
(e) receives any food for storage or sale despite k nowing the fact that 
the food is unsafe. 
CHAPTER VII 
Food Analysis and Testing 
45. Appointment of Food Analysts and assigning duties. (1) For 
carrying out the purposes of this Act, the Authority, shall appoint such number of 
Food Analysts as may be necessary to analyze or exa mine the sample of articles 
of food or food ingredients. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-secti on (1), the Authority 
may, for special purpose, with approval of the Gove rnment or any other local 
authority, assign the duties of a Food Analyst to a ny government officer or any 
officer of the local authority, and such officer sh all be regarded as a Food 
Analyst for the purposes of this Act. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or (2), no person 
shall be appointed as a Food Analyst or entrusted w ith the duties of a Food 
Analyst, if he is, directly or indirectly, involved  in any trade or business relating 
to production or marketing of any article of food or food ingredient.  
46. Food testing. (1) Any person may, after collecting or buying any 
article of food or food ingredient, cause the sampl e of such food to be analyzed 
or examined, on payment of such fees as may be pres cribed by regulation, by the 
Food Analyst under whose jurisdiction the place or source from which such 
sample is collected or bought falls and may, in the  manner prescribed by 
regulation, procure a certificate of the analysis report or test results :  
Provided that, no person shall cause a certificate issued by a food Analyst 
or a copy thereof to be exhibited at his business e stablishment or any other place 
or to be used for any advertisement. 
(2) The duties and responsibilities of the Food Ana lyst appointed under this 
section shall be prescribed by regulations. 

--- PAGE 27 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6297  
 
47. Compulsory sale or surrender of food sample for ana lysis or 
testing. (1) For analyzing or testing purpose, the Authority  or any person 
empowered by it may, on payment of the price, colle ct samples of any article of 
food or food ingredient offered for sale or kept fo r the use in production, 
processing or manufacture : 
Provided that, a sample may be collected from any s uch article of food or 
food ingredient that is not even offered for sale. 
(2) Any sample under sub-section (1) may be collect ed from any place 
including the place of sale, production, supply or storage; and the person from 
whose possession samples of any article of food or food ingredient are asked for, 
shall be bound to sell or surrender, as the case ma y be, the sample on demand of 
the Authority or the person empowered by it : 
Provided that, if the price of the sample of the ar ticle of food or food 
ingredient is demanded, such price shall be paid wi thin one month of such 
demand. 
(3) In the case of collecting any sample under this  section, the sample 
provider shall make a declaration with signature in  the prescribed form to the 
effect that he has sold or, as the case may be, sur rendered the sample to the 
Authority or the person empowered by it for analysis or test. 
(4) The Authority or the empowered person mentioned  in sub-section (1) 
shall have right, if necessary, to enter into all t he places through which the article 
of food or food ingredient passes or all places whe re the article of food or food 
ingredient is delivered or stored; and to examine any records of such places. 
48. Procedure for procuring the result of sample analysis or test. (1) If 
any person desires to analyze or otherwise examine any sample of any article of 
food or food ingredient under section 46 or if any sample is sold or surrendered 
under section 47, the receipient of such sample, where applicable  
(a) shall immediately inform the matter in writing to the person who 
sold or surrendered the sample; 
(b) shall, in the manner prescribed by regulations,  divide the sample 
into 4 (four) parts and tie up each part with seal and proper 
identification mark in presence of the person who s old or 
surrendered the sample, and thereafter, shall  
 (i) hand over one part of the sample to the sample  seller or 
provider; 
(ii) preserve one part as reference sample for futu re comparison at 
a place prescribed by regulations; and 

--- PAGE 28 ---
6298 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
(iii) send the two other parts after packing in an appropriate 
container mentioning on it the name, address and pu rpose of 
the test or analysis, in the manner prescribed by r egulations to 
the Food Analyst or the head of any food laboratory  or office 
having jurisdiction by registered post. 
(2) The Food Analyst or the head of the food labora tory or office shall, 
according to the provisions of section 49, cause to analyze or examine one part of 
the sample received under sub-section (1) and proce ed to next action; and shall 
preserve the other part in such manner and at such place as may be prescribed by 
regulations. 
49. The duties of a Food Analyst after analysis or exam ination of 
samples and giving certificate. (1) If a sample is sent to a Food Analyst for 
analysis or examination under section 48, he shall  
(a) take step to analyze or examine the sample; 
(b) issue a certificate to the sample sender mentio ning the analysis or 
test results, in a form prescribed by regulations,  within 7 (seven) 
working days in general case, and in urgent case, w ithin 3 (three) 
working days from the date of receipt of the sample; and 
(c) send one copy of the analysis or test results t o the Authority. 
(2) A document signed by the Food Analyst in the pr escribed form as a 
certificate of analysis or test result shall be tre ated as an evidence in any 
investigation, trial or proceeding conducted under this section. 
50. Order of the Court to analyze or test a sample .(1) At the stage of 
investigation or trial under this Act, the Food Cou rt may, if necessary suo-moto 
or upon an application by the plaintiff or defendan t, pass an order directing the 
Authority to analyze or examine a sample of any art icle of food or food 
ingredient. 
(2) The Authority shall, if so directed by the Food  Court under sub-section 
(1) to analyze or examine a sample of any article o f food or food ingredient, 
cause the sample to be analyzed or tested by any la boratory designated by the 
Government in this behalf and submit the report to the Court. 
(3) The report submitted before the court under sub -section (2) shall be 
admissible as evidence. 
(4) All the expenses incurred for testing or analys is under this section shall 
be borne by the plaintiff or defendant or both as per the instruction of the court. 

--- PAGE 29 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6299  
 
CHAPTER VIII 
Inspection and Seizure of Food 
51. Appointment of inspectors and assigning of their du ties .(1) The 
Authority shall appoint such numbers of Food Safety  Inspectors, as may be 
necessary, for discharging the duties assigned to them under this Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-secti on (1), the Authority 
may, for special purpose, with the approval of the Government or any other local 
authority,  assign the duties of a Food Safety Inspector to any government officer 
or any officer of the local authority, and such off icer shall, while discharging his 
duties, be deemed to be a Food Safety Inspector for the purposes of this Act. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-secti on (1) or (2), no person 
shall be appointed as Food Safety Inspector or entrusted with the duties of a Food 
Safety Inspector, if he is involved, directly or in directly, in any trade or business 
relating to production or marketing of food. 
52. Duties and responsibilities of Inspector .(1) The Inspector shall 
discharge the following duties and responsibilities, namely :  
(a) to make regular inspection of any food establis hment as per the 
direction of the Authority; 
(b) where applicable, to examine the terms and cond itions of any 
licence for a food establishment; 
(c) to collect a sample of any food or food ingredi ent and send it to a 
Food Analyst for analysis or test, if it appears to  him that such 
article of food or food ingredient is being manufac tured, stored, 
sold or exhibited to sell, in deviation of the prov isions of this act or 
any other existing law; 
(d) to receive, preserve and seize samples of food,  and to preserve all 
records of inspection and to provide copies thereof, according to the 
direction of the Food Court; 
(e) to make inquiries and inspections,  where neces sary, to identify 
whether the article of food or food ingredient is b eing produced, 
stored or marketed in deviation of the provisions o f this  act or any 
other existing law; 
(f) to make search into a vehicle suspicious of car rying any unsafe 
food, by stopping it for a minimum reasonable time; 
(g) where the licence or registration of the food b usiness of a person is 
revoked or suspended in a proceeding under this Act , to keep 
records of the name and address of the person and t he nature and 
location of the food business; 

--- PAGE 30 ---
6300 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
(h) to keep records of court orders passed in every  proceeding 
conducted under this Act; 
(i) to send a copy of the court order passed in a p roceeding filed or 
lodged under this Act to the Authority; 
(j) to seize any article of food or food ingredient  suspected to be 
banned for importing or marketing; 
(k) to hold inquiry or investigation, as the case m ay be, upon receipt of 
any complaint as to the deviation of any provision of this Act; 
(l)  to seize adulterated food; and 
(m) to discharge such other duties as may be direct ed by the Authority 
or the Food Court. 
53. Power to enter into any food establishment, buildin g or house .(1) 
An Inspector may, in such manner as instructed by t he Authority, enter into any 
food establishment, building or house at any time t o ascertain whether anything 
is being carried out there in violation of any provision of this Act. 
(2) No person shall resist or cause to resist an In spector from entering into 
any food establishment, building or house for carry ing out any lawful functions 
under sub-section (1). 
54. Submission of ledger books, vouchers, documents and  accounts.  
An  Inspector may, by a written notice, require any  person carrying on a trade or 
commerce of any article of food or food ingredient,  or any producer or supplier 
to submit before him for inspection all ledger book s, vouchers and other 
documents relating to all his  trades, businesses, manufactures, traceability or 
marketing, and every person receiving such notice shall be bound to comply with 
the demand of the Inspector. 
55. Power to seize adulterated food .(1) An Inspector may, at any time 
other than the time from midnight to dawn,  
(a) inspect any distribution  premises or supply ro utes, stock premises, 
or the condition of substance to be used in food, i ts place or its 
processing; and  
(b) examine any ingredient used or to be used in fo od or any container 
or receptacle used for manufacturing or marketing any food. 
(2) No person shall resist or cause to resist any I nspector from inspecting or 
examining anything under sub-section (1). 
(3) While making an inspection or examination under  sub-section (1), if the 
Inspector has reasons to believe that any living or  active ingredient or any 

--- PAGE 31 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6301  
 
container or any of its component, which is kept fo r use in manufacturing or 
marketing a food, is injurious to or unwholesome fo r human health or 
adulterated, he may seize all such things or all foods made of such things. 
(4) No person shall resist or cause to resist the a ct of seizing anything under 
sub-section (3). 
(5) If any food, ingredient or substance which is b elieved to be adulterated 
is under sub-section (3), the Inspector seizing it shall, forthwith separating the 
sample of it in accordance with the provisions of s ection 48, divide and hand 
over the same in the  prescribed manner. 
(6) If any living or active thing or any container or any of its component or 
any article of food made of them is seized under su b-section (3), the person 
seizing it shall  
(a) immediately remove such living or active thing,  container or its 
component; and 
(b) after removal, keep them in safe place by marki ng and sealing in 
the prescribed manner, and take necessary measures according to 
the provisions of section 56 or section 57, as the case may be. 
(7) No person shall resist or cause to resist an ac t of removing anything 
under the provisions of this section, and remove an y living or active thing, food 
ingredient or container from the safe custody as ke pt under clause (b) of sub-
section (6) or hand over the same from safe custody. 
56. Destruction of living or active ingredient, etc .(1) If any living or 
active thing, article of food, food ingredient, sub stance or container is seized 
under sub-section (3) of section 55 by an Inspector  or any person so empowered 
by any authority; all such things may be instantly destroyed in presence of the 
owner or of the person in whose possession such thi ngs have been found, or in 
presence of two witnesses on the written consent of the owner. 
(2) If such consent is not given, the living or act ive thing or article of food  
or food ingredient or substance so seized shall for thwith be destroyed if such 
things are found perishable or injurious to human h ealth or unwholesome as 
human food to the judgment of the Inspector or of t he authorized person seizing 
such things under sub-section (3) of section 55. 
(3) All the expenses incurred for taking measures u nder sub-sections (1) 
and (2) shall be realized as public demand from the  person in whose possession 
such living or active thing or article of food or f ood ingredient or substance or 
container has been found at the time of seizure. 

--- PAGE 32 ---
6302 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
57. Disposal of seized living or active thing or articl e of food or food 
ingredient or substance or container .-(1) If any living or active thing or any 
ingredient or substance or container is seized by a n Inspector or any person 
authorized in this  behalf by the Authority as spec ified in sub-section (3) of 
section 55, and such living or active thing or arti cle of food or food ingredient or 
substance or container is not destroyed according t o section 56, the person from 
whose possession such things have been seized shall  be informed to the effect 
that the seized things shall be produced before a M agistrate having  local 
jurisdiction. 
(2) Whether any complaint is made or not under this  Act or any other law 
for the time being in force, if any living or activ e thing or any ingredient or any 
substance or any container is produced before a Magistrate to consider the matter 
under sub-section (1), and if the Magistrate, after taking such evidence as he may 
deem fit, thinks that  
(a) such food or living or active thing or article of food or food 
ingredient or substance is injurious to human healt h or 
unwholesome as human food or contaminated or adulterated; or 
(b) for sale purpose, such container is used to man ufacture or preserve 
any adulterated food, or any other food injurious to human health or 
unwholesome as human food or contaminated food, or contains any 
material, ingredient or substance which is injurious to human health 
or unwholesome as human food, 
he shall confiscate such living or active thing or article of food or food ingredient 
or substance or container in favour of the Authorit y and ask the Authority to 
forthwith destroy them, and if so asked, the Author ity shall destroy it or take 
measures to otherwise dispose of it. 
CHAPTER IX 
Offences, penalty, etc. 
58 . Punishment for the violation of any provision of this Act.  
Whoever violates any provision of this Act as speci fied in column 3 of the 
Schedule, shall be deemed to have committed an offe nce under this Act, and 
shall be punished with the penalty specified in col umn (4) for such first offence 
and with the penalty specified in column (5) for repetition of such offence. 
59. Violation of provisions or committing offence by a company .(1) If 
the person, who commits an offence or violates any provision of this Act or rules 
or regulations made thereunder, is a company; the o wner, partner, proprietor, 
chairman, managing director, director, general mana ger, manager or secretary of 
that company, or any of its directly concerned offi cer, employee or agent, by 
whatever name called, shall be deemed to have viola ted the provision or 
committed the offence, unless he  proves that such violation or offence has been 
committed beyond his knowledge or despite his due d iligence, he has failed to 
prevent such violation or offence. 

--- PAGE 33 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6303  
 
(2) If the company mentioned in sub-section (1) is a body corporate, besides 
prosecuting or convicting the persons mentioned in such sub-section, the 
company may also be prosecuted and convicted in the  same proceeding, but in 
criminal cases, the company shall only be liable to  fine under the relevant 
provision. 
Explanation .In this section  
(a) “company” includes any organization, whether in corporated or not, 
commercial institution, partnership business, socie ty, club or 
association; and 
(b) “director”, in case of commercial institution, also includes any of its 
partner or any member of the Board of Directors. 
60. Bailable and cognizable offence .The offences mentioned in sections 
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34, 35 and 37 of this Act shall be 
cognizable and non-bailable, and except those offen ces, all other offences of this 
Act shall be non-cognizable and bailable. 
61. Procedures to be followed for an offence under any other 
law .Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law for the time 
being in force, where an offence stated under this Act is also a special offence 
with higher penalty under any other Act, there shal l be no legal bar to try the 
offence under this Act, treating it to be an anti-f ood safety special offence under 
this Act : 
Provided that  if the Authority, depending on the n ature and significance of 
the offence, thinks that,  it is justified to try t he case by the concerned special 
court or special tribunal, as the case may be; the Chairman shall, through the 
officer authorized by him, take necessary step to f ile the case before the special 
court or the special tribunal, as the case may be, to ensure effective trial. 
62. Payment of a part of the fine to the complainant .If any person is 
convicted and thereby punished with fine by a Food Court, the concerned 
complainant shall be entitled to get 25 (twenty five) percent of the said amount as 
incentive : 
Provided that if the complainant is an officer or e mployee of the Authority, 
he shall not be eligible to get such incentive. 
63. Cooperation in identifying the actual offender, etc. (1) If it appears 
beyond doubt that the food seller is not involved k nowingly in any act of 
violation of any provision of this Act, and if the food seller is ready, if necessary, 
to cooperate with the Authority to identify the vio lator of the provision of this 
Act, necessary steps may be initiated to identify t he actual violator instead of 
prosecuting the food seller under this Act. 

--- PAGE 34 ---
6304 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
(2) Where any contaminated, adulterated, misbranded  or unwholesome 
article of food or food ingredient is sold from any  shop, and if such article of 
food or food ingredient is produced or prepared in a legal or approved industry, 
factory or food establishment, and if it appears be yond doubt that the owner of 
the shop or shopkeeper or manager has no involvemen t with the production or 
manufacture process of such article of food or food  ingredient, and if the owner 
of the shop or shopkeeper is ready, if necessary, t o cooperate with the Authority 
to identify the violator of the provision of this A ct, necessary steps may be 
initiated to identify the actual person who violate s instead of prosecuting or 
taking administrative measures against the owner of  the shop or shopkeeper or 
manager under this Act. 
(3) If any person, after purchasing any food, sells  the same as a hawker or a 
feriwala for his livelihood, and if such food is found to be  misbranded, 
adulterated or otherwise defective, and if the food  consumer is affected thereby, 
and if it appears beyond doubt for similar reason t hat he has not, willfully or 
inconvenience with or knowingly sold the food to th e consumer for gaining any 
illegal benefit, and the hawker or a feriwala is ready, if necessary, to cooperate 
with the Authority to identify the violator of the provision of this Act, necessary 
steps may be taken to identify the actual violator instead of prosecuting or taking 
administrative measures against the hawker or the feriwala under this Act. 
(4) If any highly perishable food, like raw fish an d vegetables, is found in 
naturally spoiled condition with any hawker or a feriwala or at any shop, and if it 
appears beyond doubt for similar reason that he has  not, willfully or in 
connivance with, sold or attempted to sell such foo d to the consumer for gaining 
any illegal benefit knowing that the food has turne d spoiled, then, instead of 
prosecuting or taking administrative measures or pr oceedings against the hawker 
or the feriwala or the shopkeeper under this Act, preventive measur es may be 
taken by the Authority against such spoilage of food. 
(5) Any person indemnified from the liabilities und er this section shall,if 
directed or requested by the Authority, be bound to  assist the Authority to 
immediately identify the source of the misbranded o r adulterated food and, if 
necessary, to become a witness during trial. 
CHAPTER X 
Food Court, Complaint, Trial, etc. 
64. Designation of Food Court, its power and jurisd iction. (1) There 
shall be such numbers of courts as may be necessary  to be called the Pure Food 
Court for the trial of offences under this Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
for the purposes of sub-section (1), the Government  in consultation with the 
Supreme Court may, by notification in the official Gazette, designate any court of 

--- PAGE 35 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6305  
 
1st   Class Magistrate or, as  the case may be, in Metr opolitan area, the court of 
Metropolitan Magistrate as Pure Food Court and, if more than one court are 
designated, shall specify the jurisdiction of each court. 
(3) The Government in consultation with the Supreme  Court may, from 
time to time, by notification in the official Gazet te, define or redefine the 
jurisdiction of the court designated under sub-section (1). 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
in respect of imposing fine to any person under thi s Act, the Food Court shall 
have the power to impose fine of any scale as provided in this Act. 
65. Trial. (1) The trial of an offence under this Act shall generally be held 
by the Food Court within whose local jurisdiction, the offence is committed. 
(2) The Food Court shall try the offences under thi s Act summarily and in 
this behalf, unless otherwise provided in this Act,  shall follow, to the extent it 
applies, the provisions laid down in Chapter XXII o f the Code of Criminal 
Procedure. 
66. Complaint and case filing.- (1) Any person, including food 
purchaser, consumer, food receiver or user, may lod ge a complaint in writing to 
the Chairman or any person authorized by him in thi s behalf or an Inspector, in 
respect of any anti-food safety practice under this Act. 
(2) After being informed of an offence under this A ct, the Chairman or the 
person authorized by him in this behalf or the Insp ector, if primarily be 
confirmed about the commission of such offence afte r making necessary inquiry 
or investigation, shall file a case before the Food Court.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in this section, any person 
may lodge a case before the Food Court in respect o f any anti-food safety 
practice within 30 (thirty) days from the date of cause of such act.  
67.  Investigation and Investigating Officer.— (1) Any officer authorized 
by the Chairman or an Inspector having local jurisd iction shall, as an 
Investigating Officer, investigate all complaints lodged under this Act.   
(2) During investigation of any complaint under thi s Act, the Investigating 
Officer may exercise powers as an Officer-in-Charge of a Police Station pursuant 
to the Code of Criminal Procedure.  
(3) During investigation under sub-section (1), the  Investigating Officer 
may, if necessary, ask for assistance from any orga nization including law 
enforcing agencies, and if such assistance is asked for, the organization or agency 
shall be bound to provide that. 

--- PAGE 36 ---
6306 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
68.  Time limit for investigation.— (1) Any officer authorized by the 
Chairman or the Inspector shall conclude the invest igation within 90 (ninety) 
working days from the date of issuing order of investigation by a Food Court.  
(2) If it is not possible, for any reason, to concl ude the investigation within 
the time limit mentioned in sub-section (1) the inv estigating officer shall, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, conclude the inv estigation within next 30 
(thirty) working days and inform the Food Court the reasons thereof in writing. 
(3) If the investigation is not also possible to be  concluded within the time 
limit mentioned in sub-section (2), the concerned i nvestigation officer shall, 
within next 24 (twenty four) hours of expiring the extended period, inform the 
Food Court in writing as to non-completion of such investigation.  
(4) After being informed of the non-completion of t he investigation under 
sub-section (3) the Food Court shall transfer the r esponsibility of investigation of 
such complaint to any other officer and pass an ord er directing the controlling 
authority of such officer to initiate departmental proceedings against him treating 
his failure to conclude the investigation within th e given timeframe as a 
disqualification. 
69.  Power to issue warrant.—If  the Food Court, upon an application made 
by the Authority or an officer empowered in this be half, has reasons to believe 
that— 
(a) an offence under this Act has been committed by  any person; or 
(b) anything relating to an offence under this Act,  or any document, 
paper or other thing necessary to prove such offence has been left in 
any place or lied with any person; 
the court may, recording the reasons of such belief in writing, issue a warrant to 
arrest such person or to search the place at any time by day or at night.  
70. Power  to search, arrest, etc.—The provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure shall be applicable for a search warrant,  an arrest or a seizure to be 
effected under this Act.  
71.  Provisions regarding the person arrested and goods  seized. —(1) If 
any person is arrested or any article is seized on the basis of a warrant issued 
under section 69, the person so arrested, or the article so seized shall forthwith be 
sent to the Officer-in-Charge of the nearest Police Station. 
(2) The officer to whom the person so arrested, or the article so seized is 
sent under sub-section (1), shall take, as soon as possible, legal actions against 
such person or in respect of such article. 
72.  Evidential value of photographs taken on camera or  of recorded 
conversation, etc. —Notwithstanding anything contained contrary to the  
Evidence Act, 1872 (Act No. 1 of 1872), if any pers on connected with the food 
safety management system or any member of any law e nforcing agency or any 

--- PAGE 37 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6307  
 
other person shoots or takes any video footage or s till photograph of, or records 
any conversation or  discussions about, any occurre nce of committing or 
preparation for committing or abetment for committi ng any offence or mischief 
stated in this Act, such video footage, still photo graph or audio record shall be 
admissible as evidence at the trial of any case rel ating to such offence or 
mischief. 
73.  Testing of food to ascertain the veracity of compl aint .—(1) In 
ascertaining the veracity of any complaint, where t he Food Court is of the 
opinion that it is not possible to ascertain the ve racity of any complaint without 
proper analysis or testing of any food; the court m ay ask the complainant to 
submit a sample of such food, cause it to be authen ticated with a seal in the 
manner determined by it and send it to such laborat ory as designated by the 
Government or the Authority with a direction to ana lyze or examine the sample 
for tracing the presence of prohibited substance inside it. 
(2) If any sample of food is sent to a laboratory u nder sub-section (1) for 
test, the laboratory shall forward a test report to  the court within 1 (one) month 
from the date of sending of the sample : 
Provided that, if the test is not possible to be co mpleted within the time 
limit for any reason, the time for the test may be extended for another 2 (two) 
weeks if the laboratory asks for. 
(3) Food Court may pass an order directing the conc erned person or 
authority to submit necessary money or fee to meet the expenditure to be 
incurred for the test before sending the sample to the laboratory designated by the 
Government or the Authority for the sake of ascerta ining the veracity of the 
complaint. 
74. Appeal. —If any person is aggrieved with any judgment or or der passed 
by a Food Court, he may, within 30 (thirty) days fr om the date of receiving such 
judgment or order, prefer an appeal to the Court of  a Sessions judge having local 
jurisdiction over the matter. 
75. Jurisdiction of the Mobile Court. —Notwithstanding anything 
contained contrary in this Act, the offences under this Act may, to the extent it is 
applicable, be tried in accordance with the provisi ons of the Mobile Court Act, 
2009 (Act No. LIX of 2009). 
CHAPTER XI 
Civil Remedies 
76. Civil remedies. —(1) There shall be no legal bar for any affected 
person or food consumer to institute a civil suit i n a competent court claiming 
civil remedies against a person who is prosecuted for any activity against this Act 
and convicted of any criminal offence committed thereby. 

--- PAGE 38 ---
6308 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
(2) If any food consumer is affected by any anti-fo od safety practice of any 
seller, and if the reparation is assessable in term s of money, the consumer may 
institute a civil suit in any competent court claim ing compensation not exceeding 
5 (five) times of the assessed amount. 
(3) The Civil court may, upon appreciation of the p laint, written statement, 
evidences and other circumstances, pass an order di recting the defendant to pay 
such amount of compensation, as considered  for the  sake of justice, but within 
the limit not exceeding 5 (five) times of the actual assessed amount. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (Act No. V of 1908), the Contract A ct, 1872 (Act No. IX of 
1872) and the Civil Courts Act, 1887 (Act No. XII o f 1887), the provisions of 
this section shall prevail. 
77. Civil appeal. — Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in th e 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act No. V of 1908) a nd the Civil Courts Act, 
1887 (Act No. XII of 1887), an appeal against the j udgment or decree passed by 
a court under section 76 of this Act, shall lie to the Court of a District judge 
having local jurisdiction within 90 days from the date of such judgment. 
CHAPTER XII 
Administrative Inquiry and Fine 
(78).  Power of the Authority to conduct administrative i nquiry.— (1) If 
any person has any allegation on purity of any food , he may, in the manner 
prescribed by  rules, apply in writing to the Autho rity for taking Administrative 
action against it. 
(2) Within 30 (thirty) days from the date of receiv ing an application under 
sub-section (1), the Authority shall, after conduct ing necessary administrative 
inquiry on such allegation, give an appropriate dir ection to the person who 
prepared, marketed or sold such food as to what he should do for this. 
(3) For holding the inquiry under sub-section (2), the Authority may 
appoint any of its officers as Inquiry Officer for the purposes of this section. 
(4) The Inquiry Officer appointed under sub-section  (3) shall hold inquiry 
in the manner prescribed by rules and submit a report thereof to the Authority. 
(5) If the Authority, after considering the inquiry  report submitted under 
this section, gives any direction to any person rel ated there to, such person shall 
be bound to comply with such directions, and if he fails to comply with such 
direction, the Authority may, in the manner prescribed by rules, impose upon him 
an administrative fine not exceeding Taka 3 (three) lakh. 

--- PAGE 39 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6309  
 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-secti on (5), no 
administrative fine shall be imposable under this s ection for the violation of 
sections 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34, 35 and 37. 
(7) If any person fails to pay the administrative f ine imposed under this 
section within prescribed time, it shall be recoverable as public demand under the 
Public Demands Recovery Act, 1913 (Act IX of 1913). 
79. Appeal. — If any person is aggrieved by an order passed und er section 
78, he may prefer an appeal to the Government withi n 30 (thirty) days from the 
date of receiving such order and the Government sha ll take appropriate steps to 
dispose of such appeal within 60 (sixty) days from the date of preferring the 
appeal. 
CHAPTER XIII 
Miscellaneous 
80.  Public servant.— The Chairman, members, officers and employees of 
the Authority including every Food Analyst and Insp ector appointed or 
designated under this Act shall be regarded as a pu blic servant within the 
meaning of the term “ public servant” as defined in section 21 of the Penal Code. 
81. Failure in discharging duties by government officer s and 
employees. — (1) If any Government officer and employee fails to discharge his 
duty in preventing offence under this Act or in vio lation of any provision, he 
shall be liable for such failure or violation unles s he proves that such failure or 
violation, as the case may be, has occurred beyond his knowledge or despite his 
due diligence, has failed to prevent such failure or violation. 
(2) If any government officer and employee is found liable for the failure or 
violation mentioned in sub-section (1), he shall be  charged with violation of the 
conduct and disciplinary rules applicable for a gov ernment employee, and 
consequently departmental proceedings shall be initiated against him. 
82. Cooperation of the concerned Ministries, Divisions and 
organizations. — To ensure proper implementation of this Act, the Government 
may, if necessary, in consultation with the Council , by notification in the official 
Gazette, specify the areas of cooperation among dif ferent Ministries, Divisions, 
Directorates, Departments and Local Government Bodi es and non-governmental 
organizations and determine their duties, responsibilities and accountabilities. 
83. Preservation of confidential information. — If the Authority is 
requested not to disclose any information provided to it by a person and if the 
Authority agreed with such request, the Authority shall not disclose it to any third 
party, or use it as a source of information: 

--- PAGE 40 ---
6310 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
Provided that, such information may be disclosed to  the public if it is 
necessary for the protection of public health. 
84. Annual report. — The Authority shall, by 31 st  January of every year, 
submit to the Government an annual report on the ac tivities carried out by it 
during the previous year and the Government may, at  any time, require the 
Authority to submit a report or statement on any of its activities. 
85. Delegation of Power. — In case of urgency, the Authority may, by an 
order made in writing, upon specific conditions, de legate any of his powers or 
responsibilities entrusted upon it by this Act to the Chairman, any member or any 
other officer of it. 
86. Power to make rules. — The Government may, by notification in the 
official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
87. Power to make regulations. — The Authority, with prior approval of 
the Government, may, by notification in the officia l Gazette, make regulations to 
carry out the purposes of this Act. 
88. Removal of ambiguity. — To give effect to any provision of this Act, if 
any ambiguity arises, the Government may, by notifi cation in the official 
Gazette, remove such ambiguity, subject to keeping consistency with the 
provisions of this Act. 
89. Publication of English translation of the Act. — After the 
commencement of this Act, the Government may, if ne cessary, by notification in 
the official Gazette, publish an authentic English text of the Act: 
Provided that in the event of conflict between the Bangla and the English 
text, the Bangla text shall prevail. 
90. Repeal and savings. — (1) On the commencement of this Act, the Pure 
Food Ordinance, 1959 (E.P. Ordinance No. LXVIII of 1959), hereinafter referred 
as the said Act, shall stand repealed. 
(2) The Pure Food Court established under sub-secti on (1) of section 41 of 
the said Act shall be deemed to be the Pure Food Co urt as designated under 
section 64, and the cases pending before Pure Food Court may be disposed of 
therein according to sub-section (3) of this section.  
(3)  The cases remain  pending under the said Act i mmediately before such 
repeal and the appeal against the order passed, jud gment given or penalty 
imposed  in such cases shall be conducted and dispo sed of respectively  before 
the concerned  Pure Food Court and the concerned court of appeal in such way as 
if the said Act had not been repealed. 

--- PAGE 41 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6311  
 
(4)  Notwithstanding repeal under sub-section (1) 
(a) the rules and regulations made under the said A ct, subject to being 
consistence with this Act, and until repealed or am ended under 
this Act, shall  have effect; 
(b) any act or proceeding under the said Act if rem ains pending 
immediately before the commencement of this Act sha ll  be 
disposed of under the said Act in such way as if th is Act had not 
been made. 
SCHEDULE 
(See Section 58)  
Sl.  
No. 
Sections  Description of offences Impossible penalty 
for the offences 
committed first 
time 
Imposable 
penalty for 
repetition of 
offences 
1 2 3 4 5 
(1) 23 To use  or include any 
chemical or its ingredients  
or substance, insecticides or 
pesticides or food colour or 
flavouring  matter, or any 
other intoxicated additives 
or processing aid in any 
article of food which my 
cause  injury of toxicity to 
human health or store, 
market or sell any article of 
food or food ingredient 
possessing  such matter. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
 
peri od not exceeding  
five years but not 
less than four years, 
or a fine not 
exceeding Taka ten 
lac but not less than 
Taka five lac, or with 
both. 
 
Imprisonment  
for  five years 
or a fine of 
Taka twenty 
lac, or with 
both. 
(2) 24 To use or include any 
radioactive or irradiated 
matter or naturally or 
otherwise occurring similar 
matter or heavy metal, in 
violation of maximum 
acceptable limit set out by 
regulations of under any 
other law for the time being 
in force, in any article of 
food or food ingredient. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
 
period not exceeding 
four years but not 
less than three years, 
or a fine not 
exceeding Taka eight 
lac but not less than 
Taka four lac, or 
with both. 
Imprisonment  
for four years 
or a fine of 
Taka sixteen 
lac, or with 
both. 

--- PAGE 42 ---
6312 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
1 2 3 4 5 
(3) 25 With an intention to sell, to  
produce, or import, process, 
store, supply or sell any 
adulterated article of food or 
food ingredient. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
three years but not 
less than one year, or 
a fine not exceeding 
Taka six lac but not 
less than Taka three 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for three 
years or a 
fine of Taka 
twelve lac, or 
with both. 
(4) 26 To produce or import, 
process, store, distribute or 
sell any article of food or 
food ingredient which is of 
sub-standard for human 
consumption in comparison 
with the standard set out by 
regulations. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
three years but not 
less than one year, or 
a fine not exceeding 
Taka six lac but not 
less than Taka three 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for three years 
or a fine of 
Taka twelve  
lac, or with 
both. 
(5) 27 To use or include any food 
additive or processing aid in 
violation of maximum 
acceptable limit set out by 
regulations, in any article of 
food or food ingredient; or 
import, process, store, 
distribute or sell such 
produced food or food 
ingredient processing such 
matter.  
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
three years but not 
less than one year, or 
a fine not exceeding 
Taka six lac but not 
less than Taka three 
lac, or with both. 
Imprison 
ment  
for three years 
or a fine of 
Taka twelve  
lac, or with 
both. 
(6) 28 To keep or permit to keep in 
his food establishment, any 
oil for industrial use or 
industrial waste or 
adulterant with intention of 
mixing with any article of 
food or food ingredient. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
three years but not 
less than one year, or 
a fine not exceeding 
Taka six lac but not 
less than Taka three 
lac, or with both. 
Imprison 
ment  
for three years 
or a fine of 
Taka twelve  
lac, or with 
both. 
(7) 29 To import, process, store, 
distribute or sell any article 
of food or food ingredients 
after the date of its expiry. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
three years but not 
less than one year, or 
a fine not exceeding 
Taka six lac but not 
less than Taka four 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for three years 
or a fine of 
Taka twelve  
lac, or with 
both. 

--- PAGE 43 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6313  
 
1 2 3 4 5 
(8) 30 To use or include any 
insecticide or pesticide 
residue, veterinary or 
aquaculture drug residue, 
hormone, antibiotic or 
growth promoters residue, 
solvent residue, active 
ingredients of drugs, 
microbes or parasites in any 
food or food ingredient in 
excessive quantity than the 
recommended maximum 
residue limit as determined 
by regulations or under any 
other law for the time being  
in force; or store, market or 
sell any such article of food 
or food ingredient 
possessing such matter.   
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
three years but not 
less than one year, or 
a fine not exceeding 
Taka six lac but not 
less than Taka three 
lac, or with both. 
I
mprisonment  
for three years 
or a fine of 
Taka twelve  
lac, or with 
both. 
 (9) 31 To produce, import, process, 
store, distribute or sell any  
genetically modified food, 
engineered food, organic 
food, irradiated food, 
proprietary food, novel 
food, functional food, foods 
for  special  dietary uses, 
nutraceuticals and any such 
other food without taking 
approval in the manner 
prescribed by regulations or 
under any other law for the 
time being in force. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
three years but not 
less than one year, or 
a fine not exceeding 
Taka six lac but not 
less than Taka three 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for three years 
or a fine of 
Taka twelve  
lac, or with 
both. 
(10) 32(a) To manufacture, distribute 
or sell any packages food or 
food ingredient which are 
not packaged, marked and 
labeled in the manner as 
may be prescribed by 
regulations or under any 
other law for the time being 
in force. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
two years but not less 
than one year, or a 
fine not exceeding 
Taka four lac but not 
less than Taka two 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for two years 
or a fine of 
Taka eight 
lac, or with 
both. 

--- PAGE 44 ---
6314 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
1 2 3 4 5 
(11) 32(b) To inscribe any false 
information or claim, or any 
mischieving or misleading  
information on the label 
mentioned  in clause (a) of 
section 32 concerning the 
food contained in the 
package or concerning the 
quantity of the nutritive 
value implying medicinal or 
therapeutic claims or in 
relation to the place of 
origin of the said food.  
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
two years but not less 
than one year, or a 
fine not exceeding 
Taka four lac but not 
less than Taka two 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for two years 
or a fine of 
Taka eight 
lac, or with 
both. 
(12) 32(c) To manufacture, distribute 
or sell any packaged food or 
food ingredient without 
complying with the 
obligation of labelling it 
with a representation of 
clear information about the 
production, packaging and 
expiry date of food and 
traceability information in 
the manner prescribed by 
regulations. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
two years but not less 
than one year, or a 
fine not exceeding 
Taka four lac but not 
less than Taka two 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for  
two years 
or a fine of 
Taka eight lac, 
or with both. 
(13) 32(d) To sell any packaged food 
or food ingredient by  
changing or erasing any 
information inscribed on the 
label of the packaged food 
product or food ingredient. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
two years but not less 
than one year, or a 
fine not exceeding 
Taka four lac but not 
less than Taka two 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for  two years 
or a fine of 
Taka eight 
lac, or with 
both. 

--- PAGE 45 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6315  
 
1 2 3 4 5 
(14) 33 To manufacture, import, 
process or sell any article of 
food or food ingredient in 
unhygienic process, in 
contravention of the 
conditions and in deviation 
from the standard process 
specified by regulations or 
under any other law for the 
time being in force, which 
may cause harm to human 
health. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
three years but not 
less than one year, or 
a fine not exceeding 
Taka six lac but not 
less than Taka three 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for three years 
or a fine of 
Taka twelve 
lac, or with 
both. 
(15) 34 To produce, store or sell 
diseased or decomposed fish 
or fish product or meat of 
diseased or dead animals or 
fowl or decomposed milk or 
egg or any food products 
made of such thing.  
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
three years but not 
less than one year, or 
a fine not exceeding 
Taka six lac but not 
less than Taka three 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for  three 
years or a 
fine of Taka 
twelve lac, or 
with both. 
(16) 35 To cause hazard to human 
health through 
irresponsibility, negligence 
or carelessness in deviation 
from the standard prescribed 
by regulations or under any 
other law for the time being 
in force, while rendering 
food serving or catering 
services in a hotel, 
restaurant or food premises, 
by himself or by any other 
person acting on his behalf.   
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
three years but not 
less than one year, or 
a fine not exceeding 
Taka six lac but not 
less than Taka three 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for three years 
or a fine of 
Taka twelve  
lac, or with 
both. 

--- PAGE 46 ---
6316 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 
 
1 2 3 4 5 
(17) 36 To cause to manufacture, 
store or sell any article of 
food or food ingredient by 
any person who is suffering 
from any contagious 
diseases. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
two years but not less 
than one year, or a 
fine not exceeding 
Taka four lac but not 
less than Taka two 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for  
two years 
or a fine of 
Taka eight lac, 
or with both. 
(18) 37 To manufacture, import, 
store, distribute or sell any 
misbranded  article of food 
or food ingredient similar or 
resembling to any article of 
food or food ingredient 
marketed in the name of any 
trade mark or in any trade 
name registered under the 
Trademark Act, 2009 (Act 
No, XIX of 2009). 
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
three years but not 
less than one year, or 
a fine not exceeding 
Taka six lac but not 
less than Taka three 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for  three 
years or a 
fine of Taka 
twelve lac, or 
with both. 
(19) 38 While operating food 
business, not to keep the 
name, address and receipt or 
challan  of all parties 
involved  in the 
manufacture, import, 
processing, storage, 
distribution or sale of any 
article of food or food 
ingredient, and to exhibit 
the information to the 
Authority or any officer 
designated by it.    
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
one year but not less 
than six months, or a 
fine not exceeding 
Taka two lac but not 
less than Taka one 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for  one year 
or a fine of 
Taka four lac, 
or with both. 
(20) 39 To manufacture, import, 
process, store, distribute or 
sell of any article of food or 
food ingredient without 
registration which is 
mandatory under any other 
law for the time being in 
force.  
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
one year but not less 
than six months, or a 
fine not exceeding 
Taka two lac but not 
less than Taka one 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for  one year 
or a fine of 
Taka four lac, 
or with both. 

--- PAGE 47 ---
 evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, GwcÖj 28, 2016 6317  
 
1 2 3 4 5 
(21) 40 While operating food 
business, not to extend  all 
kinds of cooperation to the 
Authority or to any officer 
designated by it at the time 
of inspection, investigation, 
sample collection or testing 
of anything related to food 
business. 
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
one year but not less 
than six months, or a 
fine not exceeding 
Taka two lac but not 
less than Taka one 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for  one year 
or a fine of 
Taka four lac, 
or with both. 
(22) 41 With the intention of 
marketing or selling any 
article of food or food 
ingredient, to give any false 
or misleading  information 
or statement in 
advertisement in 
contravention of the 
conditions for advertisement  
prescribed by regulations.  
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
one year but not less 
than six months, or a 
fine not exceeding 
Taka two lac but not 
less than Taka one 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for  one year 
or a fine of 
Taka four lac, 
or with both. 
(23) 42 To make, print, publish or 
propagate any advertisement 
containing false information 
as to quality, nature, 
standard etc. of any article 
of food or food ingredient.  
Imprisonment  for  a 
period not exceeding 
one year but not less 
than six months, or a 
fine not exceeding 
Taka two lac but not 
less than Taka one 
lac, or with both. 
Imprisonment  
for  one year 
or a fine of 
Taka four lac, 
or with both. 
 By order of the President 
 A. M. Badrudduja 
 Secretary 
 Ministry of Food 
†gvt  Avãyj gv‡jK, DccwiPvjK, evsjv‡`k miKvwi gy`ªYvjq, †ZRMuvI, XvKv KZ…©K gyw`ªZ|  
†gvt AvjgMxi †nv‡mb, DccwiPvjK, evsjv‡`k dig I cÖKvkbv Awdm, 
 †ZRMuvI, XvKv KZ…©K cÖKvwkZ| web site: www.bgpress.gov.bd 